 Part III: Considerations on the Universe as a Whole
 XXX. Cosmological Difficulties of Newton’s Theory
 XXXI. The Possibility of a “Finite” and yet “Unbounded” Universe
 XXXII. The Structure of Space According to the General Theory of Relativity

 Appendices:
 I. Simple Derivation of the Lorentz Transformation (supplementary to section XI)
 II. Minkowski’s Four-Dimensional Space (“World”) (supplementary to section XVII)
 III. The Experimental Confirmation of the General Theory of Relativity
 IV. The Structure of Space According to the General Theory of Relativity (supplementary to section XXXII)
 V. Relativity and the Problem of Space


Note: The fifth Appendix was added by Einstein at the time of the
fifteenth re-printing of this book; and as a result is still under
copyright restrictions so cannot be added without the permission of the
publisher.




PREFACE


The present book is intended, as far as possible, to give an exact
insight into the theory of Relativity to those readers who, from a
general scientific and philosophical point of view, are interested in
the theory, but who are not conversant with the mathematical apparatus
of theoretical physics. The work presumes a standard of education
corresponding to that of a university matriculation examination, and,
despite the shortness of the book, a fair amount of patience and force
of will on the part of the reader. The author has spared himself no
pains in his endeavour to present the main ideas in the simplest and
most intelligible form, and on the whole, in the sequence and
connection in which they actually originated. In the interest of
clearness, it appeared to me inevitable that I should repeat myself
frequently, without paying the slightest attention to the elegance of
the presentation. I adhered scrupulously to the precept of that
brilliant theoretical physicist L. Boltzmann, according to whom matters
of elegance ought to be left to the tailor and to the cobbler. I make
no pretence of having withheld from the reader difficulties which are
inherent to the subject. On the other hand, I have purposely treated
the empirical physical foundations of the theory in a “step-motherly”
fashion, so that readers unfamiliar with physics may not feel like the
wanderer who was unable to see the forest for the trees. May the book
bring some one a few happy hours of suggestive thought!

December, 1916

 A. EINSTEIN
