PART I: THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY




I.
PHYSICAL MEANING OF GEOMETRICAL PROPOSITIONS


In your schooldays most of you who read this book made acquaintance
with the noble building of Euclid’s geometry, and you remember—perhaps
with more respect than love—the magnificent structure, on the lofty
staircase of which you were chased about for uncounted hours by
conscientious teachers. By reason of our past experience, you would
certainly regard everyone with disdain who should pronounce even the
most out-of-the-way proposition of this science to be untrue. But
perhaps this feeling of proud certainty would leave you immediately if
some one were to ask you: “What, then, do you mean by the assertion
that these propositions are true?” Let us proceed to give this question
a little consideration.

Geometry sets out from certain conceptions such as “plane,” “point,”
and “straight line,” with which we are able to associate more or less
definite ideas, and from certain simple propositions (axioms) which, in
virtue of these ideas, we are inclined to accept as “true.” Then, on
the basis of a logical process, the justification of which we feel
ourselves compelled to admit, all remaining propositions are shown to
follow from those axioms, _i.e._ they are proven. A proposition is then
correct (“true”) when it has been derived in the recognised manner from
the axioms. The question of “truth” of the individual geometrical
propositions is thus reduced to one of the “truth” of the axioms. Now
it has long been known that the last question is not only unanswerable
by the methods of geometry, but that it is in itself entirely without
meaning. We cannot ask whether it is true that only one straight line
goes through two points. We can only say that Euclidean geometry deals
with things called “straight lines,” to each of which is ascribed the
property of being uniquely determined by two points situated on it. The
concept “true” does not tally with the assertions of pure geometry,
because by the word “true” we are eventually in the habit of
designating always the correspondence with a “real” object; geometry,
however, is not concerned with the relation of the ideas involved in it
to objects of experience, but only with the logical connection of these
ideas among themselves.

It is not difficult to understand why, in spite of this, we feel
constrained to call the propositions of geometry “true.” Geometrical
ideas correspond to more or less exact objects in nature, and these
last are undoubtedly the exclusive cause of the genesis of those ideas.
Geometry ought to refrain from such a course, in order to give to its
structure the largest possible logical unity. The practice, for
example, of seeing in a “distance” two marked positions on a
practically rigid body is something which is lodged deeply in our habit
of thought. We are accustomed further to regard three points as being
situated on a straight line, if their apparent positions can be made to
coincide for observation with one eye, under suitable choice of our
place of observation.

If, in pursuance of our habit of thought, we now supplement the
propositions of Euclidean geometry by the single proposition that two
points on a practically rigid body always correspond to the same
distance (line-interval), independently of any changes in position to
which we may subject the body, the propositions of Euclidean geometry
then resolve themselves into propositions on the possible relative
position of practically rigid bodies.[1] Geometry which has been
supplemented in this way is then to be treated as a branch of physics.
We can now legitimately ask as to the “truth” of geometrical
propositions interpreted in this way, since we are justified in asking
whether these propositions are satisfied for those real things we have
associated with the geometrical ideas. In less exact terms we can
express this by saying that by the “truth” of a geometrical proposition
in this sense we understand its validity for a construction with rule
and compasses.


 [1] It follows that a natural object is associated also with a
 straight line. Three points _A, B_ and _C_ on a rigid body thus lie in
 a straight line when the points _A_ and _C_ being given, _B_ is chosen
 such that the sum of the distances _AB_ and _BC_ is as short as
 possible. This incomplete suggestion will suffice for the present
 purpose.


Of course the conviction of the “truth” of geometrical propositions in
this sense is founded exclusively on rather incomplete experience. For
the present we shall assume the “truth” of the geometrical
propositions, then at a later stage (in the general theory of
relativity) we shall see that this “truth” is limited, and we shall
consider the extent of its limitation.




II.
THE SYSTEM OF CO-ORDINATES


On the basis of the physical interpretation of distance which has been
indicated, we are also in a position to establish the distance between
two points on a rigid body by means of measurements. For this purpose
we require a “distance” (rod _S_) which is to be used once and for all,
and which we employ as a standard measure. If, now, _A_ and _B_ are two
points on a rigid body, we can construct the line joining them
according to the rules of geometry; then, starting from _A_, we can
mark off the distance _S_ time after time until we reach _B_. The
number of these operations required is the numerical measure of the
distance _AB_. This is the basis of all measurement of length.[2]


 [2] Here we have assumed that there is nothing left over _i.e._ that
 the measurement gives a whole number. This difficulty is got over by
 the use of divided measuring-rods, the introduction of which does not
 demand any fundamentally new method.


Every description of the scene of an event or of the position of an
object in space is based on the specification of the point on a rigid
body (body of reference) with which that event or object coincides.
This applies not only to scientific description, but also to everyday
life. If I analyse the place specification “Trafalgar Square,
London”[3] I arrive at the following result. The earth is the rigid
body to which the specification of place refers; “Trafalgar Square,
London” is a well-defined point, to which a name has been assigned, and
with which the event coincides in space.[4]


 [3]

I have chosen this as being more familiar to the English reader than
the “Potzdammer Platz, Berlin,” which is referred to in the original.
(R. W. L.)


 [4] It is not necessary here to investigate further the significance
 of the expression “coincidence in space.” This conception is
 sufficiently obvious to ensure that differences of opinion are
 scarcely likely to arise as to its applicability in practice.


This primitive method of place specification deals only with places on
the surface of rigid bodies, and is dependent on the existence of
points on this surface which are distinguishable from each other. But
we can free ourselves from both of these limitations without altering
the nature of our specification of position. If, for instance, a cloud
is hovering over Trafalgar Square, then we can determine its position
relative to the surface of the earth by erecting a pole perpendicularly
on the Square, so that it reaches the cloud. The length of the pole
measured with the standard measuring-rod, combined with the
specification of the position of the foot of the pole, supplies us with
a complete place specification. On the basis of this illustration, we
are able to see the manner in which a refinement of the conception of
position has been developed.

(_a_) We imagine the rigid body, to which the place specification is
referred, supplemented in such a manner that the object whose position
we require is reached by the completed rigid body.
