
(_b_) In locating the position of the object, we make use of a number
(here the length of the pole measured with the measuring-rod) instead
of designated points of reference.

(_c_) We speak of the height of the cloud even when the pole which
reaches the cloud has not been erected. By means of optical
observations of the cloud from different positions on the ground, and
taking into account the properties of the propagation of light, we
determine the length of the pole we should have required in order to
reach the cloud.

From this consideration we see that it will be advantageous if, in the
description of position, it should be possible by means of numerical
measures to make ourselves independent of the existence of marked
positions (possessing names) on the rigid body of reference. In the
physics of measurement this is attained by the application of the
Cartesian system of co-ordinates.

This consists of three plane surfaces perpendicular to each other and
rigidly attached to a rigid body. Referred to a system of co-ordinates,
the scene of any event will be determined (for the main part) by the
specification of the lengths of the three perpendiculars or
co-ordinates (_x, y, z_) which can be dropped from the scene of the
event to those three plane surfaces. The lengths of these three
perpendiculars can be determined by a series of manipulations with
rigid measuring-rods performed according to the rules and methods laid
down by Euclidean geometry.

In practice, the rigid surfaces which constitute the system of
co-ordinates are generally not available; furthermore, the magnitudes
of the co-ordinates are not actually determined by constructions with
rigid rods, but by indirect means. If the results of physics and
astronomy are to maintain their clearness, the physical meaning of
specifications of position must always be sought in accordance with the
above considerations.[5]


 [5] A refinement and modification of these views does not become
 necessary until we come to deal with the general theory of relativity,
 treated in the second part of this book.


We thus obtain the following result: Every description of events in
space involves the use of a rigid body to which such events have to be
referred. The resulting relationship takes for granted that the laws of
Euclidean geometry hold for “distances;” the “distance” being
represented physically by means of the convention of two marks on a
rigid body.


III.

SPACE AND TIME IN CLASSICAL MECHANICS

The purpose of mechanics is to describe how bodies change their
position in space with “time.” I should load my conscience with grave
sins against the sacred spirit of lucidity were I to formulate the aims
of mechanics in this way, without serious reflection and detailed
explanations. Let us proceed to disclose these sins.

It is not clear what is to be understood here by “position” and
“space.” I stand at the window of a railway carriage which is
travelling uniformly, and drop a stone on the embankment, without
throwing it. Then, disregarding the influence of the air resistance, I
see the stone descend in a straight line. A pedestrian who observes the
misdeed from the footpath notices that the stone falls to earth in a
parabolic curve. I now ask: Do the “positions” traversed by the stone
lie “in reality” on a straight line or on a parabola? Moreover, what is
meant here by motion “in space”? From the considerations of the
previous section the answer is self-evident. In the first place we
entirely shun the vague word “space,” of which, we must honestly
acknowledge, we cannot form the slightest conception, and we replace it
by “motion relative to a practically rigid body of reference.” The
positions relative to the body of reference (railway carriage or
embankment) have already been defined in detail in the preceding
section. If instead of “body of reference” we insert “system of
co-ordinates,” which is a useful idea for mathematical description, we
are in a position to say: The stone traverses a straight line relative
to a system of co-ordinates rigidly attached to the carriage, but
relative to a system of co-ordinates rigidly attached to the ground
(embankment) it describes a parabola. With the aid of this example it
is clearly seen that there is no such thing as an independently
existing trajectory (lit. “path-curve”[6], but only a trajectory
relative to a particular body of reference.


 [6] That is, a curve along which the body moves.


In order to have a _complete_ description of the motion, we must
specify how the body alters its position _with time; i.e._ for every
point on the trajectory it must be stated at what time the body is
situated there. These data must be supplemented by such a definition of
time that, in virtue of this definition, these time-values can be
regarded essentially as magnitudes (results of measurements) capable of
observation. If we take our stand on the ground of classical mechanics,
we can satisfy this requirement for our illustration in the following
manner. We imagine two clocks of identical construction; the man at the
railway-carriage window is holding one of them, and the man on the
footpath the other. Each of the observers determines the position on
his own reference-body occupied by the stone at each tick of the clock
he is holding in his hand. In this connection we have not taken account
of the inaccuracy involved by the finiteness of the velocity of
propagation of light. With this and with a second difficulty prevailing
here we shall have to deal in detail later.


IV. THE GALILEIAN SYSTEM OF CO-ORDINATES


As is well known, the fundamental law of the mechanics of
Galilei-Newton, which is known as the _law of inertia_, can be stated
thus: A body removed sufficiently far from other bodies continues in a
state of rest or of uniform motion in a straight line. This law not
only says something about the motion of the bodies, but it also
indicates the reference-bodies or systems of coordinates, permissible
in mechanics, which can be used in mechanical description. The visible
fixed stars are bodies for which the law of inertia certainly holds to
a high degree of approximation. Now if we use a system of co-ordinates
which is rigidly attached to the earth, then, relative to this system,
every fixed star describes a circle of immense radius in the course of
an astronomical day, a result which is opposed to the statement of the
law of inertia. So that if we adhere to this law we must refer these
motions only to systems of coordinates relative to which the fixed
stars do not move in a circle. A system of co-ordinates of which the
state of motion is such that the law of inertia holds relative to it is
called a “Galileian system of co-ordinates.” The laws of the mechanics
of Galilei-Newton can be regarded as valid only for a Galileian system
of co-ordinates.


V.

THE PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY (IN THE RESTRICTED SENSE)

In order to attain the greatest possible clearness, let us return to
our example of the railway carriage supposed to be travelling
uniformly. We call its motion a uniform translation (“uniform” because
it is of constant velocity and direction, “translation” because
although the carriage changes its position relative to the embankment
yet it does not rotate in so doing). Let us imagine a raven flying
through the air in such a manner that its motion, as observed from the
embankment, is uniform and in a straight line. If we were to observe
the flying raven from the moving railway carriage. we should find that
the motion of the raven would be one of different velocity and
direction, but that it would still be uniform and in a straight line.
