If a ray of light be
sent along the embankment, we see from the above that the tip of the
ray will be transmitted with the velocity _c_ relative to the
embankment. Now let us suppose that our railway carriage is again
travelling along the railway lines with the velocity _v_, and that its
direction is the same as that of the ray of light, but its velocity of
course much less. Let us inquire about the velocity of propagation of
the ray of light relative to the carriage. It is obvious that we can
here apply the consideration of the previous section, since the ray of
light plays the part of the man walking along relatively to the
carriage. The velocity _W_ of the man relative to the embankment is
here replaced by the velocity of light relative to the embankment. _w_
is the required velocity of light with respect to the carriage, and we
have

_w = c – v._

The velocity of propagation ot a ray of light relative to the carriage
thus comes out smaller than _c_.

But this result comes into conflict with the principle of relativity
set forth in Section V. For, like every other general law of nature,
the law of the transmission of light _in vacuo_ [in vacuum] must,
according to the principle of relativity, be the same for the railway
carriage as reference-body as when the rails are the body of reference.
But, from our above consideration, this would appear to be impossible.
If every ray of light is propagated relative to the embankment with the
velocity _c_, then for this reason it would appear that another law of
propagation of light must necessarily hold with respect to the
carriage—a result contradictory to the principle of relativity.

In view of this dilemma there appears to be nothing else for it than to
abandon either the principle of relativity or the simple law of the
propagation of light _in vacuo_. Those of you who have carefully
followed the preceding discussion are almost sure to expect that we
should retain the principle of relativity, which appeals so
convincingly to the intellect because it is so natural and simple. The
law of the propagation of light _in vacuo_ would then have to be
replaced by a more complicated law conformable to the principle of
relativity. The development of theoretical physics shows, however, that
we cannot pursue this course. The epoch-making theoretical
investigations of H. A. Lorentz on the electrodynamical and optical
phenomena connected with moving bodies show that experience in this
domain leads conclusively to a theory of electromagnetic phenomena, of
which the law of the constancy of the velocity of light in vacuo is a
necessary consequence. Prominent theoretical physicists were therefore
more inclined to reject the principle of relativity, in spite of the
fact that no empirical data had been found which were contradictory to
this principle.

At this juncture the theory of relativity entered the arena. As a
result of an analysis of the physical conceptions of time and space, it
became evident that _in reality there is not the least incompatibilitiy
between the principle of relativity and the law of propagation of
light_, and that by systematically holding fast to both these laws a
logically rigid theory could be arrived at. This theory has been called
the _special theory of relativity_ to distinguish it from the extended
theory, with which we shall deal later. In the following pages we shall
present the fundamental ideas of the special theory of relativity.


VIII.

ON THE IDEA OF TIME IN PHYSICS

Lightning has struck the rails on our railway embankment at two places
_A_ and _B_ far distant from each other. I make the additional
assertion that these two lightning flashes occurred simultaneously. If
I ask you whether there is sense in this statement, you will answer my
question with a decided “Yes.” But if I now approach you with the
request to explain to me the sense of the statement more precisely, you
find after some consideration that the answer to this question is not
so easy as it appears at first sight.

After some time perhaps the following answer would occur to you: “The
significance of the statement is clear in itself and needs no further
explanation; of course it would require some consideration if I were to
be commissioned to determine by observations whether in the actual case
the two events took place simultaneously or not.” I cannot be satisfied
with this answer for the following reason. Supposing that as a result
of ingenious considerations an able meteorologist were to discover that
the lightning must always strike the places _A_ and _B_ simultaneously,
then we should be faced with the task of testing whether or not this
theoretical result is in accordance with the reality. We encounter the
same difficulty with all physical statements in which the conception
“simultaneous” plays a part. The concept does not exist for the
physicist until he has the possibility of discovering whether or not it
is fulfilled in an actual case. We thus require a definition of
simultaneity such that this definition supplies us with the method by
means of which, in the present case, he can decide by experiment
whether or not both the lightning strokes occurred simultaneously. As
long as this requirement is not satisfied, I allow myself to be
deceived as a physicist (and of course the same applies if I am not a
physicist), when I imagine that I am able to attach a meaning to the
statement of simultaneity. (I would ask the reader not to proceed
farther until he is fully convinced on this point.)

After thinking the matter over for some time you then offer the
following suggestion with which to test simultaneity. By measuring
along the rails, the connecting line _AB_ should be measured up and an
observer placed at the mid-point M of the distance _AB_. This observer
should be supplied with an arrangement (_e.g._ two mirrors inclined at
90°) which allows him visually to observe both places _A_ and _B_ at
the same time. If the observer perceives the two flashes of lightning
at the same time, then they are simultaneous.

I am very pleased with this suggestion, but for all that I cannot
regard the matter as quite settled, because I feel constrained to raise
the following objection: “Your definition would certainly be right, if
only I knew that the light by means of which the observer at _M_
perceives the lightning flashes travels along the length _A_ → _M_ with
the same velocity as along the length _B_ → _M_. But an examination of
this supposition would only be possible if we already had at our
disposal the means of measuring time. It would thus appear as though we
were moving here in a logical circle.”

After further consideration you cast a somewhat disdainful glance at
me—and rightly so—and you declare: “I maintain my previous definition
nevertheless, because in reality it assumes absolutely nothing about
light. There is only _one_ demand to be made of the definition of
simultaneity, namely, that in every real case it must supply us with an
empirical decision as to whether or not the conception that has to be
defined is fulfilled. That my definition satisfies this demand is
indisputable. That light requires the same time to traverse the path
_A_ → _M_ as for the path _B_ → _M_ is in reality neither a
_supposition nor a hypothesis_ about the physical nature of light, but
a _stipulation_ which I can make of my own freewill in order to arrive
at a definition of simultaneity.”

It is clear that this definition can be used to give an exact meaning
not only to _two_ events, but to as many events as we care to choose,
and independently of the positions of the scenes of the events with
respect to the body of reference[7] (here the railway embankment). We
are thus led also to a definition of “time” in physics.
