Once in possession of the Lorentz transformation, however, we
can combine this with the principle of relativity, and sum up the
theory thus:

Every general law of nature must be so constituted that it is
transformed into a law of exactly the same form when, instead of the
space-time variables _x, y, z, t_ of the original coordinate system
_K_, we introduce new space-time variables _x′, y′, z′, t′_ of a
co-ordinate system _K′_. In this connection the relation between the
ordinary and the accented magnitudes is given by the Lorentz
transformation. Or in brief: General laws of nature are co-variant with
respect to Lorentz transformations.

This is a definite mathematical condition that the theory of relativity
demands of a natural law, and in virtue of this, the theory becomes a
valuable heuristic aid in the search for general laws of nature. If a
general law of nature were to be found which did not satisfy this
condition, then at least one of the two fundamental assumptions of the
theory would have been disproved. Let us now examine what general
results the latter theory has hitherto evinced.


XV.

GENERAL RESULTS OF THE THEORY

It is clear from our previous considerations that the (special) theory
of relativity has grown out of electrodynamics and optics. In these
fields it has not appreciably altered the predictions of theory, but it
has considerably simplified the theoretical structure, _i.e._ the
derivation of laws, and—what is incomparably more important—it has
considerably reduced the number of independent hypotheses forming the
basis of theory. The special theory of relativity has rendered the
Maxwell-Lorentz theory so plausible, that the latter would have been
generally accepted by physicists even if experiment had decided less
unequivocally in its favour.

Classical mechanics required to be modified before it could come into
line with the demands of the special theory of relativity. For the main
part, however, this modification affects only the laws for rapid
motions, in which the velocities of matter _v_ are not very small as
compared with the velocity of light. We have experience of such rapid
motions only in the case of electrons and ions; for other motions the
variations from the laws of classical mechanics are too small to make
themselves evident in practice. We shall not consider the motion of
stars until we come to speak of the general theory of relativity. In
accordance with the theory of relativity the kinetic energy of a
material point of mass _m_ is no longer given by the well-known
expression

image020


but by the expression

image021


This expression approaches infinity as the velocity _v_ approaches the
velocity of light _c_. The velocity must therefore always remain less
than _c_, however great may be the energies used to produce the
acceleration. If we develop the expression for the kinetic energy in
the form of a series, we obtain

image022


When

image023


is small compared with unity, the third of these terms is always small
in comparison with the second, which last is alone considered in
classical mechanics. The first term _mc_2 does not contain the
velocity, and requires no consideration if we are only dealing with the
question as to how the energy of a point-mass; depends on the velocity.
We shall speak of its essential significance later.

The most important result of a general character to which the special
theory of relativity has led is concerned with the conception of mass.
Before the advent of relativity, physics recognised two conservation
laws of fundamental importance, namely, the law of the conservation of
energy and the law of the conservation of mass these two fundamental
laws appeared to be quite independent of each other. By means of the
theory of relativity they have been united into one law. We shall now
briefly consider how this unification came about, and what meaning is
to be attached to it.

The principle of relativity requires that the law of the conservation
of energy should hold not only with reference to a co-ordinate system
_K_, but also with respect to every co-ordinate system _K′_ which is in
a state of uniform motion of translation relative to _K_, or, briefly,
relative to every “Galileian” system of co-ordinates. In contrast to
classical mechanics; the Lorentz transformation is the deciding factor
in the transition from one such system to another.

By means of comparatively simple considerations we are led to draw the
following conclusion from these premises, in conjunction with the
fundamental equations of the electrodynamics of Maxwell: A body moving
with the velocity _v_, which absorbs[11] an amount of energy _E_0 in
the form of radiation without suffering an alteration in velocity in
the process, has, as a consequence, its energy increased by an amount

image024



 [11] _E_0 is the energy taken up, as judged from a co-ordinate system
 moving with the body.


In consideration of the expression given above for the kinetic energy
of the body, the required energy of the body comes out to be

image025


Thus the body has the same energy as a body of mass

image026


moving with the velocity _v_. Hence we can say: If a body takes up an
amount of energy _E_0, then its inertial mass increases by an amount

image027


the inertial mass of a body is not a constant but varies according to
the change in the energy of the body. The inertial mass of a system of
bodies can even be regarded as a measure of its energy. The law of the
conservation of the mass of a system becomes identical with the law of
the conservation of energy, and is only valid provided that the system
neither takes up nor sends out energy. Writing the expression for the
energy in the form

image028


we see that the term _mc_2, which has hitherto attracted our attention,
is nothing else than the energy possessed by the body[12] before it
absorbed the energy _E_0.


 [12] As judged from a co-ordinate system moving with the body.


A direct comparison of this relation with experiment is not possible at
the present time (1920; see[Note], p. 48), owing to the fact that the
changes in energy _E_0 to which we can subject a system are not large
enough to make themselves perceptible as a change in the inertial mass
of the system.

image027


is too small in comparison with the mass _m_, which was present before
the alteration of the energy. It is owing to this circumstance that
classical mechanics was able to establish successfully the conservation
of mass as a law of independent validity.


 [Note] The equation E = mc2 has been thoroughly proved time and again
 since this time.


Let me add a final remark of a fundamental nature. The success of the
Faraday-Maxwell interpretation of electromagnetic action at a distance
resulted in physicists becoming convinced that there are no such things
as instantaneous actions at a distance (not involving an intermediary
medium) of the type of Newton’s law of gravitation.

According to the theory of relativity, action at a distance with the
velocity of light always takes the place of instantaneous action at a
distance or of action at a distance with an infinite velocity of
transmission. This is connected with the fact that the velocity _c_
plays a fundamental role in this theory. In Part II we shall see in
what way this result becomes modified in the general theory of
relativity.


XVI.

EXPERIENCE AND THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY

To what extent is the special theory of relativity supported by
experience? This question is not easily answered for the reason already
mentioned in connection with the fundamental experiment of Fizeau. The
special theory of relativity has crystallised out from the
Maxwell-Lorentz theory of electromagnetic phenomena.
