Section V that all attempts of this nature led to a negative result.
Before the theory of relativity was put forward, it was difficult to
become reconciled to this negative result, for reasons now to be
discussed. The inherited prejudices about time and space did not allow
any doubt to arise as to the prime importance of the Galileian
transformation for changing over from one body of reference to another.
Now assuming that the Maxwell-Lorentz equations hold for a
reference-body _K_, we then find that they do not hold for a
reference-body _K′_ moving uniformly with respect to _K_, if we assume
that the relations of the Galileian transformation exist between the
co-ordinates of _K_ and _K′_. It thus appears that, of all Galileian
co-ordinate systems, one (_K_) corresponding to a particular state of
motion is physically unique. This result was interpreted physically by
regarding _K_ as at rest with respect to a hypothetical æther of space.
On the other hand, all coordinate systems _K′_ moving relatively to _K_
were to be regarded as in motion with respect to the æther. To this
motion of _K′_ against the æther (“æther-drift” relative to _K′_) were
attributed the more complicated laws which were supposed to hold
relative to _K′_. Strictly speaking, such an æther-drift ought also to
be assumed relative to the earth, and for a long time the efforts of
physicists were devoted to attempts to detect the existence of an
æther-drift at the earth’s surface.

In one of the most notable of these attempts Michelson devised a method
which appears as though it must be decisive. Imagine two mirrors so
arranged on a rigid body that the reflecting surfaces face each other.
A ray of light requires a perfectly definite time _T_ to pass from one
mirror to the other and back again, if the whole system be at rest with
respect to the æther. It is found by calculation, however, that a
slightly different time _T′_ is required for this process, if the body,
together with the mirrors, be moving relatively to the æther. And yet
another point: it is shown by calculation that for a given velocity _v_
with reference to the æther, this time _T′_ is different when the body
is moving perpendicularly to the planes of the mirrors from that
resulting when the motion is parallel to these planes. Although the
estimated difference between these two times is exceedingly small,
Michelson and Morley performed an experiment involving interference in
which this difference should have been clearly detectable. But the
experiment gave a negative result—a fact very perplexing to physicists.
Lorentz and FitzGerald rescued the theory from this difficulty by
assuming that the motion of the body relative to the æther produces a
contraction of the body in the direction of motion, the amount of
contraction being just sufficient to compensate for the difference in
time mentioned above. Comparison with the discussion in Section XII
shows that also from the standpoint of the theory of relativity this
solution of the difficulty was the right one. But on the basis of the
theory of relativity the method of interpretation is incomparably more
satisfactory. According to this theory there is no such thing as a
“specially favoured” (unique) co-ordinate system to occasion the
introduction of the æther-idea, and hence there can be no æther-drift,
nor any experiment with which to demonstrate it. Here the contraction
of moving bodies follows from the two fundamental principles of the
theory, without the introduction of particular hypotheses; and as the
prime factor involved in this contraction we find, not the motion in
itself, to which we cannot attach any meaning, but the motion with
respect to the body of reference chosen in the particular case in
point. Thus for a co-ordinate system moving with the earth the mirror
system of Michelson and Morley is not shortened, but it _is_ shortened
for a co-ordinate system which is at rest relatively to the sun.


XVII.

MINKOWSKI’S FOUR-DIMENSIONAL SPACE

The non-mathematician is seized by a mysterious shuddering when he
hears of “four-dimensional” things, by a feeling not unlike that
awakened by thoughts of the occult. And yet there is no more
common-place statement than that the world in which we live is a
four-dimensional space-time continuum.

Space is a three-dimensional continuum. By this we mean that it is
possible to describe the position of a point (at rest) by means of
three numbers (co-ordinates) _x, y, z_, and that there is an indefinite
number of points in the neighbourhood of this one, the position of
which can be described by co-ordinates such as _x1, y1, z1_, which may
be as near as we choose to the respective values of the co-ordinates
_x, y, z_, of the first point. In virtue of the latter property we
speak of a “continuum,” and owing to the fact that there are three
co-ordinates we speak of it as being “three-dimensional.”

Similarly, the world of physical phenomena which was briefly called
“world” by Minkowski is naturally four dimensional in the space-time
sense. For it is composed of individual events, each of which is
described by four numbers, namely, three space co-ordinates _x, y, z_,
and a time co-ordinate, the time value _t_. The “world” is in this
sense also a continuum; for to every event there are as many
“neighbouring” events (realised or at least thinkable) as we care to
choose, the co-ordinates _x1, y1, z1, t1_ of which differ by an
indefinitely small amount from those of the event _x, y, z, t_
originally considered. That we have not been accustomed to regard the
world in this sense as a four-dimensional continuum is due to the fact
that in physics, before the advent of the theory of relativity, time
played a different and more independent rôle, as compared with the
space coordinates. It is for this reason that we have been in the habit
of treating time as an independent continuum. As a matter of fact,
according to classical mechanics, time is absolute, _i.e._ it is
independent of the position and the condition of motion of the system
of co-ordinates. We see this expressed in the last equation of the
Galileian transformation (_t′_ = _t_).

The four-dimensional mode of consideration of the “world” is natural on
the theory of relativity, since according to this theory time is robbed
of its independence. This is shown by the fourth equation of the
Lorentz transformation:

image030


Moreover, according to this equation the time difference Δ_t′_ of two
events with respect to _K′_ does not in general vanish, even when the
time difference Δ_t_ of the same events with reference to _K_ vanishes.
Pure “space-distance” of two events with respect to _K_ results in
“time-distance ” of the same events with respect to _K_. But the
discovery of Minkowski, which was of importance for the formal
development of the theory of relativity, does not lie here. It is to be
found rather in the fact of his recognition that the four-dimensional
space-time continuum of the theory of relativity, in its most essential
formal properties, shows a pronounced relationship to the
three-dimensional continuum of Euclidean geometrical space.[14] In
order to give due prominence to this relationship, however, we must
replace the usual time co-ordinate t by an imaginary magnitude

image031


proportional to it. Under these conditions, the natural laws satisfying
the demands of the (special) theory of relativity assume mathematical
forms, in which the time co-ordinate plays exactly the same role as the
three space co-ordinates. Formally, these four co-ordinates correspond
exactly to the three space co-ordinates in Euclidean geometry. It must
be clear even to the non-mathematician that, as a consequence of this
purely formal addition to our knowledge, the theory perforce gained
clearness in no mean measure.


 [14] Cf.
