PART II: THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY


XVIII.

SPECIAL AND GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY

The basal principle, which was the pivot of all our previous
considerations, was the _special_ principle of relativity, _i.e._ the
principle of the physical relativity of all _uniform_ motion. Let as
once more analyse its meaning carefully.

It was at all times clear that, from the point of view of the idea it
conveys to us, every motion must be considered only as a relative
motion. Returning to the illustration we have frequently used of the
embankment and the railway carriage, we can express the fact of the
motion here taking place in the following two forms, both of which are
equally justifiable:

(_a_) The carriage is in motion relative to the embankment,


(_b_) The embankment is in motion relative to the carriage.


In (_a_) the embankment, in (_b_) the carriage, serves as the body of
reference in our statement of the motion taking place. If it is simply
a question of detecting or of describing the motion involved, it is in
principle immaterial to what reference-body we refer the motion. As
already mentioned, this is self-evident, but it must not be confused
with the much more comprehensive statement called “the principle of
relativity,” which we have taken as the basis of our investigations.

The principle we have made use of not only maintains that we may
equally well choose the carriage or the embankment as our
reference-body for the description of any event (for this, too, is
self-evident). Our principle rather asserts what follows: If we
formulate the general laws of nature as they are obtained from
experience, by making use of

(_a_) the embankment as reference-body,


(_b_) the railway carriage as reference-body,


then these general laws of nature (_e.g._ the laws of mechanics or the
law of the propagation of light _in vacuo_) have exactly the same form
in both cases. This can also be expressed as follows: For the physical
description of natural processes, neither of the reference bodies _K,
K′_ is unique (lit. “specially marked out”) as compared with the other.
Unlike the first, this latter statement need not of necessity hold _a
priori;_ it is not contained in the conceptions of “motion” and
“reference-body” and derivable from them; only _experience_ can decide
as to its correctness or incorrectness.

Up to the present, however, we have by no means maintained the
equivalence of _all_ bodies of reference _K_ in connection with the
formulation of natural laws. Our course was more on the following
Iines. In the first place, we started out from the assumption that
there exists a reference-body _K_, whose condition of motion is such
that the Galileian law holds with respect to it: A particle left to
itself and sufficiently far removed from all other particles moves
uniformly in a straight line. With reference to K (Galileian
reference-body) the laws of nature were to be as simple as possible.
But in addition to K, all bodies of reference _K′_ should be given
preference in this sense, and they should be exactly equivalent to _K_
for the formulation of natural laws, provided that they are in a state
of _uniform rectilinear and non-rotary motion_ with respect to _K_; all
these bodies of reference are to be regarded as Galileian
reference-bodies. The validity of the principle of relativity was
assumed only for these reference-bodies, but not for others (_e.g._
those possessing motion of a different kind). In this sense we speak of
the _special_ principle of relativity, or special theory of relativity.

In contrast to this we wish to understand by the “general principle of
relativity” the following statement: All bodies of reference _K, K′_,
etc., are equivalent for the description of natural phenomena
(formulation of the general laws of nature), whatever may be their
state of motion. But before proceeding farther, it ought to be pointed
out that this formulation must be replaced later by a more abstract
one, for reasons which will become evident at a later stage.

Since the introduction of the special principle of relativity has been
justified, every intellect which strives after generalisation must feel
the temptation to venture the step towards the general principle of
relativity. But a simple and apparently quite reliable consideration
seems to suggest that, for the present at any rate, there is little
hope of success in such an attempt; Let us imagine ourselves
transferred to our old friend the railway carriage, which is travelling
at a uniform rate. As long as it is moving uniformly, the occupant of
the carriage is not sensible of its motion, and it is for this reason
that he can without reluctance interpret the facts of the case as
indicating that the carriage is at rest, but the embankment in motion.
Moreover, according to the special principle of relativity, this
interpretation is quite justified also from a physical point of view.
If the motion of the carriage is now changed into a non-uniform motion,
as for instance by a powerful application of the brakes, then the
occupant of the carriage experiences a correspondingly powerful jerk
forwards. The retarded motion is manifested in the mechanical behaviour
of bodies relative to the person in the railway carriage. The
mechanical behaviour is different from that of the case previously
considered, and for this reason it would appear to be impossible that
the same mechanical laws hold relatively to the non-uniformly moving
carriage, as hold with reference to the carriage when at rest or in
uniform motion. At all events it is clear that the Galileian law does
not hold with respect to the non-uniformly moving carriage. Because of
this, we feel compelled at the present juncture to grant a kind of
absolute physical reality to non-uniform motion, in opposition to the
general principle of relativity. But in what follows we shall soon see
that this conclusion cannot be maintained.


XIX.

THE GRAVITATIONAL FIELD

“If we pick up a stone and then let it go, why does it fall to the
ground?” The usual answer to this question is: “Because it is attracted
by the earth.” Modern physics formulates the answer rather differently
for the following reason. As a result of the more careful study of
electromagnetic phenomena, we have come to regard action at a distance
as a process impossible without the intervention of some intermediary
medium. If, for instance, a magnet attracts a piece of iron, we cannot
be content to regard this as meaning that the magnet acts directly on
the iron through the intermediate empty space, but we are constrained
to imagine—after the manner of Faraday—that the magnet always calls
into being something physically real in the space around it, that
something being what we call a “magnetic field.” In its turn this
magnetic field operates on the piece of iron, so that the latter
strives to move towards the magnet. We shall not discuss here the
justification for this incidental conception, which is indeed a
somewhat arbitrary one. We shall only mention that with its aid
electromagnetic phenomena can be theoretically represented much more
satisfactorily than without it, and this applies particularly to the
transmission of electromagnetic waves. The effects of gravitation also
are regarded in an analogous manner.

The action of the earth on the stone takes place indirectly. The earth
produces in its surrounding a gravitational field, which acts on the
stone and produces its motion of fall. As we know from experience, the
intensity of the action on a body dimishes according to a quite
definite law, as we proceed farther and farther away from the earth.
