From our point of view this means: The law governing the properties of
the gravitational field in space must be a perfectly definite one, in
order correctly to represent the diminution of gravitational action
with the distance from operative bodies. It is something like this: The
body (_e.g._ the earth) produces a field in its immediate neighbourhood
directly; the intensity and direction of the field at points farther
removed from the body are thence determined by the law which governs
the properties in space of the gravitational fields themselves.

In contrast to electric and magnetic fields, the gravitational field
exhibits a most remarkable property, which is of fundamental importance
for what follows. Bodies which are moving under the sole influence of a
gravitational field receive an acceleration, _which does not in the
least depend either on the material or on the physical state of the
body._ For instance, a piece of lead and a piece of wood fall in
exactly the same manner in a gravitational field (_in vacuo_), when
they start off from rest or with the same initial velocity. This law,
which holds most accurately, can be expressed in a different form in
the light of the following consideration.

According to Newton’s law of motion, we have

(Force) = (inertial mass) x (acceleration),

where the “inertial mass” is a characteristic constant of the
accelerated body. If now gravitation is the cause of the acceleration,
we then have

(Force) = (gravitational mass) x (intensity of the gravitational
field),

where the “gravitational mass” is likewise a characteristic constant
for the body. From these two relations follows:

image032


If now, as we find from experience, the acceleration is to be
independent of the nature and the condition of the body and always the
same for a given gravitational field, then the ratio of the
gravitational to the inertial mass must likewise be the same for all
bodies. By a suitable choice of units we can thus make this ratio equal
to unity. We then have the following law: The _gravitational_ mass of a
body is equal to its _inertial_ mass.

It is true that this important law had hitherto been recorded in
mechanics, but it had not been _interpreted_. A satisfactory
interpretation can be obtained only if we recognise the following fact:
_The same_ quality of a body manifests itself according to
circumstances as “inertia” or as “weight” (lit. “heaviness”). In the
following section we shall show to what extent this is actually the
case, and how this question is connected with the general postulate of
relativity.


XX.

THE EQUALITY OF INERTIAL AND GRAVITATIONAL MASS AS AN ARGUMENT FOR THE
GENERAL POSTULATE OF RELATIVITY

We imagine a large portion of empty space, so far removed from stars
and other appreciable masses, that we have before us approximately the
conditions required by the fundamental law of Galilei. It is then
possible to choose a Galileian reference-body for this part of space
(world), relative to which points at rest remain at rest and points in
motion continue permanently in uniform rectilinear motion. As
reference-body let us imagine a spacious chest resembling a room with
an observer inside who is equipped with apparatus. Gravitation
naturally does not exist for this observer. He must fasten himself with
strings to the floor, otherwise the slightest impact against the floor
will cause him to rise slowly towards the ceiling of the room.

To the middle of the lid of the chest is fixed externally a hook with
rope attached, and now a “being” (what kind of a being is immaterial to
us) begins pulling at this with a constant force. The chest together
with the observer then begin to move “upwards” with a uniformly
accelerated motion. In course of time their velocity will reach
unheard-of values—provided that we are viewing all this from another
reference-body which is not being pulled with a rope.

But how does the man in the chest regard the Process? The acceleration
of the chest will be transmitted to him by the reaction of the floor of
the chest. He must therefore take up this pressure by means of his legs
if he does not wish to be laid out full length on the floor. He is then
standing in the chest in exactly the same way as anyone stands in a
room of a home on our earth. If he releases a body which he previously
had in his land, the accelertion of the chest will no longer be
transmitted to this body, and for this reason the body will approach
the floor of the chest with an accelerated relative motion. The
observer will further convince himself _that the acceleration of the
body towards the floor of the chest is always of the same magnitude,
whatever kind of body he may happen to use for the experiment._

Relying on his knowledge of the gravitational field (as it was
discussed in the preceding section), the man in the chest will thus
come to the conclusion that he and the chest are in a gravitational
field which is constant with regard to time. Of course he will be
puzzled for a moment as to why the chest does not fall in this
gravitational field. just then, however, he discovers the hook in the
middle of the lid of the chest and the rope which is attached to it,
and he consequently comes to the conclusion that the chest is suspended
at rest in the gravitational field.

Ought we to smile at the man and say that he errs in his conclusion? I
do not believe we ought to if we wish to remain consistent; we must
rather admit that his mode of grasping the situation violates neither
reason nor known mechanical laws. Even though it is being accelerated
with respect to the “Galileian space” first considered, we can
nevertheless regard the chest as being at rest. We have thus good
grounds for extending the principle of relativity to include bodies of
reference which are accelerated with respect to each other, and as a
result we have gained a powerful argument for a generalised postulate
of relativity.

We must note carefully that the possibility of this mode of
interpretation rests on the fundamental property of the gravitational
field of giving all bodies the same acceleration, or, what comes to the
same thing, on the law of the equality of inertial and gravitational
mass. If this natural law did not exist, the man in the accelerated
chest would not be able to interpret the behaviour of the bodies around
him on the supposition of a gravitational field, and he would not be
justified on the grounds of experience in supposing his reference-body
to be “at rest.”

Suppose that the man in the chest fixes a rope to the inner side of the
lid, and that he attaches a body to the free end of the rope. The
result of this will be to stretch the rope so that it will hang
“vertically” downwards. If we ask for an opinion of the cause of
tension in the rope, the man in the chest will say: “The suspended body
experiences a downward force in the gravitational field, and this is
neutralised by the tension of the rope; what determines the magnitude
of the tension of the rope is the _gravitational mass_ of the suspended
body.” On the other hand, an observer who is poised freely in space
will interpret the condition of things thus: “The rope must perforce
take part in the accelerated motion of the chest, and it transmits this
motion to the body attached to it. The tension of the rope is just
large enough to effect the acceleration of the body. That which
determines the magnitude of the tension of the rope is the _inertial
mass_ of the body.” Guided by this example, we see that our extension
of the principle of relativity implies the _necessity_ of the law of
the equality of inertial and gravitational mass. Thus we have obtained
a physical interpretation of this law.
