
From our consideration of the accelerated chest we see that a general
theory of relativity must yield important results on the laws of
gravitation. In point of fact, the systematic pursuit of the general
idea of relativity has supplied the laws satisfied by the gravitational
field. Before proceeding farther, however, I must warn the reader
against a misconception suggested by these considerations. A
gravitational field exists for the man in the chest, despite the fact
that there was no such field for the co-ordinate system first chosen.
Now we might easily suppose that the existence of a gravitational field
is always only an _apparent_ one. We might also think that, regardless
of the kind of gravitational field which may be present, we could
always choose another reference-body such that _no_ gravitational field
exists with reference to it. This is by no means true for all
gravitational fields, but only for those of quite special form. It is,
for instance, impossible to choose a body of reference such that, as
judged from it, the gravitational field of the earth (in its entirety)
vanishes.

We can now appreciate why that argument is not convincing, which we
brought forward against the general principle of relativity at the end
of Section XVIII. It is certainly true that the observer in the railway
carriage experiences a jerk forwards as a result of the application of
the brake, and that he recognises, in this the non-uniformity of motion
(retardation) of the carriage. But he is compelled by nobody to refer
this jerk to a “real” acceleration (retardation) of the carriage. He
might also interpret his experience thus: “My body of reference (the
carriage) remains permanently at rest. With reference to it, however,
there exists (during the period of application of the brakes) a
gravitational field which is directed forwards and which is variable
with respect to time. Under the influence of this field, the embankment
together with the earth moves non-uniformly in such a manner that their
original velocity in the backwards direction is continuously reduced.”


XXI.

IN WHAT RESPECTS ARE THE FOUNDATIONS OF CLASSICAL MECHANICS AND OF THE
SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY UNSATISFACTORY?

We have already stated several times that classical mechanics starts
out from the following law: Material particles sufficiently far removed
from other material particles continue to move uniformly in a straight
line or continue in a state of rest. We have also repeatedly emphasised
that this fundamental law can only be valid for bodies of reference _K_
which possess certain unique states of motion, and which are in uniform
translational motion relative to each other. Relative to other
reference-bodies _K_ the law is not valid. Both in classical mechanics
and in the special theory of relativity we therefore differentiate
between reference-bodies _K_ relative to which the recognised “laws of
nature” can be said to hold, and reference-bodies _K_ relative to which
these laws do not hold.

But no person whose mode of thought is logical can rest satisfied with
this condition of things. He asks: “How does it come that certain
reference-bodies (or their states of motion) are given priority over
other reference-bodies (or their states of motion)? _What is the reason
for this preference?_” In order to show clearly what I mean by this
question, I shall make use of a comparison.

I am standing in front of a gas range. Standing alongside of each other
on the range are two pans so much alike that one may be mistaken for
the other. Both are half full of water. I notice that steam is being
emitted continuously from the one pan, but not from the other. I am
surprised at this, even if I have never seen either a gas range or a
pan before. But if I now notice a luminous something of bluish colour
under the first pan but not under the other, I cease to be astonished,
even if I have never before seen a gas flame. For I can only say that
this bluish something will cause the emission of the steam, or at least
_possibly_ it may do so. If, however, I notice the bluish something in
neither case, and if I observe that the one continuously emits steam
whilst the other does not, then I shall remain astonished and
dissatisfied until I have discovered some circumstance to which I can
attribute the different behaviour of the two pans.

Analogously, I seek in vain for a real something in classical mechanics
(or in the special theory of relativity) to which I can attribute the
different behaviour of bodies considered with respect to the reference
systems _K_ and _K′_.[15] Newton saw this objection and attempted to
invalidate it, but without success. But E. Mach recognised it most
clearly of all, and because of this objection he claimed that mechanics
must be placed on a new basis. It can only be got rid of by means of a
physics which is conformable to the general principle of relativity,
since the equations of such a theory hold for every body of reference,
whatever may be its state of motion.


 [15] The objection is of importance more especially when the state of
 motion of the reference-body is of such a nature that it does not
 require any external agency for its maintenance, _e.g._ in the case
 when the reference-body is rotating uniformly.


XXII.

A FEW INFERENCES FROM THE GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY

The considerations of Section XX show that the general principle of
relativity puts us in a position to derive properties of the
gravitational field in a purely theoretical manner. Let us suppose, for
instance, that we know the space-time “course” for any natural process
whatsoever, as regards the manner in which it takes place in the
Galileian domain relative to a Galileian body of reference _K_. By
means of purely theoretical operations (_i.e._ simply by calculation)
we are then able to find how this known natural process appears, as
seen from a reference-body _K′_ which is accelerated relatively to _K_.
But since a gravitational field exists with respect to this new body of
reference _K′_, our consideration also teaches us how the gravitational
field influences the process studied.

For example, we learn that a body which is in a state of uniform
rectilinear motion with respect to _K_ (in accordance with the law of
Galilei) is executing an accelerated and in general curvilinear motion
with respect to the accelerated reference-body _K′_ (chest). This
acceleration or curvature corresponds to the influence on the moving
body of the gravitational field prevailing relatively to _K_. It is
known that a gravitational field influences the movement of bodies in
this way, so that our consideration supplies us with nothing
essentially new.

However, we obtain a new result of fundamental importance when we carry
out the analogous consideration for a ray of light. With respect to the
Galileian reference-body _K_, such a ray of light is transmitted
rectilinearly with the velocity _c_. It can easily be shown that the
path of the same ray of light is no longer a straight line when we
consider it with reference to the accelerated chest (reference-body
_K′_). From this we conclude, _that, in general, rays of light are
propagated curvilinearly in gravitational fields._ In two respects this
result is of great importance.

In the first place, it can be compared with the reality. Although a
detailed examination of the question shows that the curvature of light
rays required by the general theory of relativity is only exceedingly
small for the gravitational fields at our disposal in practice, its
estimated magnitude for light rays passing the sun at grazing incidence
is nevertheless 1.7 seconds of arc. This ought to manifest itself in
the following way.
