As seen from the earth, certain fixed stars appear
to be in the neighbourhood of the sun, and are thus capable of
observation during a total eclipse of the sun. At such times, these
stars ought to appear to be displaced outwards from the sun by an
amount indicated above, as compared with their apparent position in the
sky when the sun is situated at another part of the heavens. The
examination of the correctness or otherwise of this deduction is a
problem of the greatest importance, the early solution of which is to
be expected of astronomers.[16]


 [16] By means of the star photographs of two expeditions equipped by a
 Joint Committee of the Royal and Royal Astronomical Societies, the
 existence of the deflection of light demanded by theory was first
 confirmed during the solar eclipse of 29th May, 1919. (Cf. Appendix
 III.)


In the second place our result shows that, according to the general
theory of relativity, the law of the constancy of the velocity of light
in vacuo, which constitutes one of the two fundamental assumptions in
the special theory of relativity and to which we have already
frequently referred, cannot claim any unlimited validity. A curvature
of rays of light can only take place when the velocity of propagation
of light varies with position. Now we might think that as a consequence
of this, the special theory of relativity and with it the whole theory
of relativity would be laid in the dust. But in reality this is not the
case. We can only conclude that the special theory of relativity cannot
claim an unlimited domain of validity; its results hold only so long as
we are able to disregard the influences of gravitational fields on the
phenomena (_e.g._ of light).

Since it has often been contended by opponents of the theory of
relativity that the special theory of relativity is overthrown by the
general theory of relativity, it is perhaps advisable to make the facts
of the case clearer by means of an appropriate comparison. Before the
development of electrodynamics the laws of electrostatics were looked
upon as the laws of electricity. At the present time we know that
electric fields can be derived correctly from electrostatic
considerations only for the case, which is never strictly realised, in
which the electrical masses are quite at rest relatively to each other,
and to the co-ordinate system. Should we be justified in saying that
for this reason electrostatics is overthrown by the field-equations of
Maxwell in electrodynamics? Not in the least. Electrostatics is
contained in electrodynamics as a limiting case; the laws of the latter
lead directly to those of the former for the case in which the fields
are invariable with regard to time. No fairer destiny could be allotted
to any physical theory, than that it should of itself point out the way
to the introduction of a more comprehensive theory, in which it lives
on as a limiting case.

In the example of the transmission of light just dealt with, we have
seen that the general theory of relativity enables us to derive
theoretically the influence of a gravitational field on the course of
natural processes, the laws of which are already known when a
gravitational field is absent. But the most attractive problem, to the
solution of which the general theory of relativity supplies the key,
concerns the investigation of the laws satisfied by the gravitational
field itself. Let us consider this for a moment.

We are acquainted with space-time domains which behave (approximately)
in a “Galileian” fashion under suitable choice of reference-body,
_i.e._ domains in which gravitational fields are absent. If we now
refer such a domain to a reference-body _K′_ possessing any kind of
motion, then relative to _K′_ there exists a gravitational field which
is variable with respect to space and time.[17] The character of this
field will of course depend on the motion chosen for _K′._ According to
the general theory of relativity, the general law of the gravitational
field must be satisfied for all gravitational fields obtainable in this
way. Even though by no means all gravitationial fields can be produced
in this way, yet we may entertain the hope that the general law of
gravitation will be derivable from such gravitational fields of a
special kind. This hope has been realised in the most beautiful manner.
But between the clear vision of this goal and its actual realisation it
was necessary to surmount a serious difficulty, and as this lies deep
at the root of things, I dare not withhold it from the reader. We
require to extend our ideas of the space-time continuum still farther.


 [17] This follows from a generalisation of the discussion in Section
 XX.


XXIII.

BEHAVIOUR OF CLOCKS AND MEASURING-RODS ON A ROTATING BODY OF REFERENCE

Hitherto I have purposely refrained from speaking about the physical
interpretation of space- and time-data in the case of the general
theory of relativity. As a consequence, I am guilty of a certain
slovenliness of treatment, which, as we know from the special theory of
relativity, is far from being unimportant and pardonable. It is now
high time that we remedy this defect; but I would mention at the
outset, that this matter lays no small claims on the patience and on
the power of abstraction of the reader.

We start off again from quite special cases, which we have frequently
used before. Let us consider a space time domain in which no
gravitational field exists relative to a reference-body _K_ whose state
of motion has been suitably chosen. _K_ is then a Galileian
reference-body as regards the domain considered, and the results of the
special theory of relativity hold relative to _K_. Let us suppose the
same domain referred to a second body of reference _K′_, which is
rotating uniformly with respect to _K_. In order to fix our ideas, we
shall imagine _K′_ to be in the form of a plane circular disc, which
rotates uniformly in its own plane about its centre. An observer who is
sitting eccentrically on the disc _K′_ is sensible of a force which
acts outwards in a radial direction, and which would be interpreted as
an effect of inertia (centrifugal force) by an observer who was at rest
with respect to the original reference-body _K_. But the observer on
the disc may regard his disc as a reference-body which is “at rest”; on
the basis of the general principle of relativity he is justified in
doing this. The force acting on himself, and in fact on all other
bodies which are at rest relative to the disc, he regards as the effect
of a gravitational field. Nevertheless, the space-distribution of this
gravitational field is of a kind that would not be possible on Newton’s
theory of gravitation.[18] But since the observer believes in the
general theory of relativity, this does not disturb him; he is quite in
the right when he believes that a general law of gravitation can be
formulated—a law which not only explains the motion of the stars
correctly, but also the field of force experienced by himself.


 [18] The field disappears at the centre of the disc and increases
 proportionally to the distance from the centre as we proceed outwards.


The observer performs experiments on his circular disc with clocks and
measuring-rods. In doing so, it is his intention to arrive at exact
definitions for the signification of time- and space-data with
reference to the circular disc _K′_, these definitions being based on
his observations. What will be his experience in this enterprise?

To start with, he places one of two identically constructed clocks at
the centre of the circular disc, and the other on the edge of the disc,
so that they are at rest relative to it. We now ask ourselves whether
both clocks go at the same rate from the standpoint of the non-rotating
Galileian reference-body _K_.
