As judged from this body, the clock at
the centre of the disc has no velocity, whereas the clock at the edge
of the disc is in motion relative to _K_ in consequence of the
rotation. According to a result obtained in Section XII, it follows
that the latter clock goes at a rate permanently slower than that of
the clock at the centre of the circular disc, _i.e._ as observed from
_K_. It is obvious that the same effect would be noted by an observer
whom we will imagine sitting alongside his clock at the centre of the
circular disc. Thus on our circular disc, or, to make the case more
general, in every gravitational field, a clock will go more quickly or
less quickly, according to the position in which the clock is situated
(at rest). For this reason it is not possible to obtain a reasonable
definition of time with the aid of clocks which are arranged at rest
with respect to the body of reference. A similar difficulty presents
itself when we attempt to apply our earlier definition of simultaneity
in such a case, but I do not wish to go any farther into this question.

Moreover, at this stage the definition of the space co-ordinates also
presents insurmountable difficulties. If the observer applies his
standard measuring-rod (a rod which is short as compared with the
radius of the disc) tangentially to the edge of the disc, then, as
judged from the Galileian system, the length of this rod will be less
than 1, since, according to Section XII, moving bodies suffer a
shortening in the direction of the motion. On the other hand, the
measuring-rod will not experience a shortening in length, as judged
from _K_, if it is applied to the disc in the direction of the radius.
If, then, the observer first measures the circumference of the disc
with his measuring-rod and then the diameter of the disc, on dividing
the one by the other, he will not obtain as quotient the familiar
number π = 3.14 . . ., but a larger number,[19] whereas of course, for
a disc which is at rest with respect to _K_, this operation would yield
π exactly. This proves that the propositions of Euclidean geometry
cannot hold exactly on the rotating disc, nor in general in a
gravitational field, at least if we attribute the length 1 to the rod
in all positions and in every orientation. Hence the idea of a straight
line also loses its meaning. We are therefore not in a position to
define exactly the co-ordinates _x, y, z_ relative to the disc by means
of the method used in discussing the special theory, and as long as the
co-ordinates and times of events have not been defined, we cannot
assign an exact meaning to the natural laws in which these occur.


 [19] Throughout this consideration we have to use the Galileian
 (non-rotating) system _K_ as reference-body, since we may only assume
 the validity of the results of the special theory of relativity
 relative to _K_ (relative to _K′_ a gravitational field prevails).


Thus all our previous conclusions based on general relativity would
appear to be called in question. In reality we must make a subtle
detour in order to be able to apply the postulate of general relativity
exactly. I shall prepare the reader for this in the following
paragraphs.


XXIV.

EUCLIDEAN AND NON-EUCLIDEAN CONTINUUM

The surface of a marble table is spread out in front of me. I can get
from any one point on this table to any other point by passing
continuously from one point to a “neighbouring” one, and repeating this
process a (large) number of times, or, in other words, by going from
point to point without executing “jumps.” I am sure the reader will
appreciate with sufficient clearness what I mean here by “neighbouring”
and by “jumps” (if he is not too pedantic). We express this property of
the surface by describing the latter as a continuum.

Let us now imagine that a large number of little rods of equal length
have been made, their lengths being small compared with the dimensions
of the marble slab. When I say they are of equal length, I mean that
one can be laid on any other without the ends overlapping. We next lay
four of these little rods on the marble slab so that they constitute a
quadrilateral figure (a square), the diagonals of which are equally
long. To ensure the equality of the diagonals, we make use of a little
testing-rod. To this square we add similar ones, each of which has one
rod in common with the first. We proceed in like manner with each of
these squares until finally the whole marble slab is laid out with
squares. The arrangement is such, that each side of a square belongs to
two squares and each corner to four squares.

It is a veritable wonder that we can carry out this business without
getting into the greatest difficulties. We only need to think of the
following. If at any moment three squares meet at a corner, then two
sides of the fourth square are already laid, and, as a consequence, the
arrangement of the remaining two sides of the square is already
completely determined. But I am now no longer able to adjust the
quadrilateral so that its diagonals may be equal. If they are equal of
their own accord, then this is an especial favour of the marble slab
and of the little rods, about which I can only be thankfully surprised.
We must experience many such surprises if the construction is to be
successful.

If everything has really gone smoothly, then I say that the points of
the marble slab constitute a Euclidean continuum with respect to the
little rod, which has been used as a “distance” (line-interval). By
choosing one corner of a square as “origin” I can characterise every
other corner of a square with reference to this origin by means of two
numbers. I only need state how many rods I must pass over when,
starting from the origin, I proceed towards the “right” and then
“upwards,” in order to arrive at the corner of the square under
consideration. These two numbers are then the “Cartesian co-ordinates”
of this corner with reference to the “Cartesian co-ordinate system”
which is determined by the arrangement of little rods.

By making use of the following modification of this abstract
experiment, we recognise that there must also be cases in which the
experiment would be unsuccessful. We shall suppose that the rods
“expand” by in amount proportional to the increase of temperature. We
heat the central part of the marble slab, but not the periphery, in
which case two of our little rods can still be brought into coincidence
at every position on the table. But our construction of squares must
necessarily come into disorder during the heating, because the little
rods on the central region of the table expand, whereas those on the
outer part do not.

With reference to our little rods—defined as unit lengths—the marble
slab is no longer a Euclidean continuum, and we are also no longer in
the position of defining Cartesian co-ordinates directly with their
aid, since the above construction can no longer be carried out. But
since there are other things which are not influenced in a similar
manner to the little rods (or perhaps not at all) by the temperature of
the table, it is possible quite naturally to maintain the point of view
that the marble slab is a “Euclidean continuum.” This can be done in a
satisfactory manner by making a more subtle stipulation about the
measurement or the comparison of lengths.
