The corn of
      France is, in the corn-provinces, fully as good, and in most years nearly
      about the same price with the corn of England, though, in opulence and
      improvement, France is perhaps inferior to England. The corn-lands of
      England, however, are better cultivated than those of France, and the
      corn-lands of France are said to be much better cultivated than those of
      Poland. But though the poor country, notwithstanding the inferiority of
      its cultivation, can, in some measure, rival the rich in the cheapness and
      goodness of its corn, it can pretend to no such competition in its
      manufactures, at least if those manufactures suit the soil, climate, and
      situation, of the rich country. The silks of France are better and cheaper
      than those of England, because the silk manufacture, at least under the
      present high duties upon the importation of raw silk, does not so well
      suit the climate of England as that of France. But the hardware and the
      coarse woollens of England are beyond all comparison superior to those of
      France, and much cheaper, too, in the same degree of goodness. In Poland
      there are said to be scarce any manufactures of any kind, a few of those
      coarser household manufactures excepted, without which no country can well
      subsist.

      This great increase in the quantity of work, which, in consequence of the
      division of labour, the same number of people are capable of performing,
      is owing to three different circumstances; first, to the increase of
      dexterity in every particular workman; secondly, to the saving of the time
      which is commonly lost in passing from one species of work to another;
      and, lastly, to the invention of a great number of machines which
      facilitate and abridge labour, and enable one man to do the work of many.

      First, the improvement of the dexterity of the workmen, necessarily
      increases the quantity of the work he can perform; and the division of
      labour, by reducing every man’s business to some one simple operation, and
      by making this operation the sole employment of his life, necessarily
      increases very much the dexterity of the workman. A common smith, who,
      though accustomed to handle the hammer, has never been used to make nails,
      if, upon some particular occasion, he is obliged to attempt it, will
      scarce, I am assured, be able to make above two or three hundred nails in
      a day, and those, too, very bad ones. A smith who has been accustomed to
      make nails, but whose sole or principal business has not been that of a
      nailer, can seldom, with his utmost diligence, make more than eight
      hundred or a thousand nails in a day. I have seen several boys, under
      twenty years of age, who had never exercised any other trade but that of
      making nails, and who, when they exerted themselves, could make, each of
      them, upwards of two thousand three hundred nails in a day. The making of
      a nail, however, is by no means one of the simplest operations. The same
      person blows the bellows, stirs or mends the fire as there is occasion,
      heats the iron, and forges every part of the nail: in forging the head,
      too, he is obliged to change his tools. The different operations into
      which the making of a pin, or of a metal button, is subdivided, are all of
      them much more simple, and the dexterity of the person, of whose life it
      has been the sole business to perform them, is usually much greater. The
      rapidity with which some of the operations of those manufactures are
      performed, exceeds what the human hand could, by those who had never seen
      them, be supposed capable of acquiring.

      Secondly, the advantage which is gained by saving the time commonly lost
      in passing from one sort of work to another, is much greater than we
      should at first view be apt to imagine it. It is impossible to pass very
      quickly from one kind of work to another, that is carried on in a
      different place, and with quite different tools. A country weaver, who
      cultivates a small farm, must lose a good deal of time in passing from
      his loom to the field, and from the field to his loom. When the two trades
      can be carried on in the same workhouse, the loss of time is, no doubt,
      much less. It is, even in this case, however, very considerable. A man
      commonly saunters a little in turning his hand from one sort of employment
      to another. When he first begins the new work, he is seldom very keen and
      hearty; his mind, as they say, does not go to it, and for some time he
      rather trifles than applies to good purpose. The habit of sauntering, and
      of indolent careless application, which is naturally, or rather
      necessarily, acquired by every country workman who is obliged to change
      his work and his tools every half hour, and to apply his hand in twenty
      different ways almost every day of his life, renders him almost always
      slothful and lazy, and incapable of any vigorous application, even on the
      most pressing occasions. Independent, therefore, of his deficiency in
      point of dexterity, this cause alone must always reduce considerably the
      quantity of work which he is capable of performing.

      Thirdly, and lastly, everybody must be sensible how much labour is
      facilitated and abridged by the application of proper machinery. It is
      unnecessary to give any example. I shall only observe, therefore, that the
      invention of all those machines by which labour is so much facilitated and
      abridged, seems to have been originally owing to the division of labour.
      Men are much more likely to discover easier and readier methods of
      attaining any object, when the whole attention of their minds is directed
      towards that single object, than when it is dissipated among a great
      variety of things. But, in consequence of the division of labour, the
      whole of every man’s attention comes naturally to be directed towards some
      one very simple object. It is naturally to be expected, therefore, that
      some one or other of those who are employed in each particular branch of
      labour should soon find out easier and readier methods of performing their
      own particular work, whenever the nature of it admits of such improvement.
      A great part of the machines made use of in those manufactures in which
      labour is most subdivided, were originally the invention of common
      workmen, who, being each of them employed in some very simple operation,
      naturally turned their thoughts towards finding out easier and readier
      methods of performing it. Whoever has been much accustomed to visit such
      manufactures, must frequently have been shewn very pretty machines, which
      were the inventions of such workmen, in order to facilitate and quicken
      their own particular part of the work. In the first fire engines {this was
      the current designation for steam engines}, a boy was constantly employed
      to open and shut alternately the communication between the boiler and the
      cylinder, according as the piston either ascended or descended. One of
      those boys, who loved to play with his companions, observed that, by tying
      a string from the handle of the valve which opened this communication to
      another part of the machine, the valve would open and shut without his
      assistance, and leave him at liberty to divert himself with his
      play-fellows.
