
      Of all the countries on the coast of the Mediterranean sea, Egypt seems to
      have been the first in which either agriculture or manufactures were
      cultivated and improved to any considerable degree. Upper Egypt extends
      itself nowhere above a few miles from the Nile; and in Lower Egypt, that
      great river breaks itself into many different canals, which, with the
      assistance of a little art, seem to have afforded a communication by
      water-carriage, not only between all the great towns, but between all the
      considerable villages, and even to many farm-houses in the country, nearly
      in the same manner as the Rhine and the Maese do in Holland at present.
      The extent and easiness of this inland navigation was probably one of the
      principal causes of the early improvement of Egypt.

      The improvements in agriculture and manufactures seem likewise to have
      been of very great antiquity in the provinces of Bengal, in the East
      Indies, and in some of the eastern provinces of China, though the great
      extent of this antiquity is not authenticated by any histories of whose
      authority we, in this part of the world, are well assured. In Bengal, the
      Ganges, and several other great rivers, form a great number of navigable
      canals, in the same manner as the Nile does in Egypt. In the eastern
      provinces of China, too, several great rivers form, by their different
      branches, a multitude of canals, and, by communicating with one another,
      afford an inland navigation much more extensive than that either of the
      Nile or the Ganges, or, perhaps, than both of them put together. It is
      remarkable, that neither the ancient Egyptians, nor the Indians, nor the
      Chinese, encouraged foreign commerce, but seem all to have derived their
      great opulence from this inland navigation.

      All the inland parts of Africa, and all that part of Asia which lies any
      considerable way north of the Euxine and Caspian seas, the ancient
      Scythia, the modern Tartary and Siberia, seem, in all ages of the world,
      to have been in the same barbarous and uncivilized state in which we find
      them at present. The sea of Tartary is the frozen ocean, which admits of
      no navigation; and though some of the greatest rivers in the world run
      through that country, they are at too great a distance from one another to
      carry commerce and communication through the greater part of it. There are
      in Africa none of those great inlets, such as the Baltic and Adriatic seas
      in Europe, the Mediterranean and Euxine seas in both Europe and Asia, and
      the gulfs of Arabia, Persia, India, Bengal, and Siam, in Asia, to carry
      maritime commerce into the interior parts of that great continent; and the
      great rivers of Africa are at too great a distance from one another to
      give occasion to any considerable inland navigation. The commerce,
      besides, which any nation can carry on by means of a river which does not
      break itself into any great number of branches or canals, and which runs
      into another territory before it reaches the sea, can never be very
      considerable, because it is always in the power of the nations who possess
      that other territory to obstruct the communication between the upper
      country and the sea. The navigation of the Danube is of very little use to
      the different states of Bavaria, Austria, and Hungary, in comparison of
      what it would be, if any of them possessed the whole of its course, till
      it falls into the Black sea.
