
      The first public stamps of this kind that were affixed to the current
      metals, seem in many cases to have been intended to ascertain, what it was
      both most difficult and most important to ascertain, the goodness or
      fineness of the metal, and to have resembled the sterling mark which is at
      present affixed to plate and bars of silver, or the Spanish mark which is
      sometimes affixed to ingots of gold, and which, being struck only upon one
      side of the piece, and not covering the whole surface, ascertains the
      fineness, but not the weight of the metal. Abraham weighs to Ephron the
      four hundred shekels of silver which he had agreed to pay for the field of
      Machpelah. They are said, however, to be the current money of the
      merchant, and yet are received by weight, and not by tale, in the same
      manner as ingots of gold and bars of silver are at present. The revenues
      of the ancient Saxon kings of England are said to have been paid, not in
      money, but in kind, that is, in victuals and provisions of all sorts.
      William the Conqueror introduced the custom of paying them in money. This
      money, however, was for a long time, received at the exchequer, by weight,
      and not by tale.

      The inconveniency and difficulty of weighing those metals with exactness,
      gave occasion to the institution of coins, of which the stamp, covering
      entirely both sides of the piece, and sometimes the edges too, was
      supposed to ascertain not only the fineness, but the weight of the metal.
      Such coins, therefore, were received by tale, as at present, without the
      trouble of weighing.

      The denominations of those coins seem originally to have expressed the
      weight or quantity of metal contained in them. In the time of Servius
      Tullius, who first coined money at Rome, the Roman as or pondo contained a
      Roman pound of good copper. It was divided, in the same manner as our
      Troyes pound, into twelve ounces, each of which contained a real ounce of
      good copper. The English pound sterling, in the time of Edward I.
      contained a pound, Tower weight, of silver of a known fineness. The Tower
      pound seems to have been something more than the Roman pound, and
      something less than the Troyes pound. This last was not introduced into
      the mint of England till the 18th of Henry the VIII. The French livre
      contained, in the time of Charlemagne, a pound, Troyes weight, of silver
      of a known fineness. The fair of Troyes in Champaign was at that time
      frequented by all the nations of Europe, and the weights and measures of
      so famous a market were generally known and esteemed. The Scots money
      pound contained, from the time of Alexander the First to that of Robert
      Bruce, a pound of silver of the same weight and fineness with the English
      pound sterling. English, French, and Scots pennies, too, contained all of
      them originally a real penny-weight of silver, the twentieth part of an
      ounce, and the two hundred-and-fortieth part of a pound. The shilling,
      too, seems originally to have been the denomination of a weight. “When
      wheat is at twelve shillings the quarter,” says an ancient statute of
      Henry III. “then wastel bread of a farthing shall weigh eleven shillings
      and fourpence”. The proportion, however, between the shilling, and either
      the penny on the one hand, or the pound on the other, seems not to have
      been so constant and uniform as that between the penny and the pound.
      During the first race of the kings of France, the French sou or shilling
      appears upon different occasions to have contained five, twelve, twenty,
      and forty pennies. Among the ancient Saxons, a shilling appears at one
      time to have contained only five pennies, and it is not improbable that it
      may have been as variable among them as among their neighbours, the
      ancient Franks. From the time of Charlemagne among the French, and from
      that of William the Conqueror among the English, the proportion between
      the pound, the shilling, and the penny, seems to have been uniformly the
      same as at present, though the value of each has been very different; for
      in every country of the world, I believe, the avarice and injustice of
      princes and sovereign states, abusing the confidence of their subjects,
      have by degrees diminished the real quantity of metal, which had been
      originally contained in their coins. The Roman as, in the latter ages of
      the republic, was reduced to the twenty-fourth part of its original value,
      and, instead of weighing a pound, came to weigh only half an ounce. The
      English pound and penny contain at present about a third only; the Scots
      pound and penny about a thirty-sixth; and the French pound and penny about
      a sixty-sixth part of their original value. By means of those operations,
      the princes and sovereign states which performed them were enabled, in
      appearance, to pay their debts and fulfil their engagements with a smaller
      quantity of silver than would otherwise have been requisite. It was indeed
      in appearance only; for their creditors were really defrauded of a part of
      what was due to them. All other debtors in the state were allowed the same
      privilege, and might pay with the same nominal sum of the new and debased
      coin whatever they had borrowed in the old. Such operations, therefore,
      have always proved favourable to the debtor, and ruinous to the creditor,
      and have sometimes produced a greater and more universal revolution in the
      fortunes of private persons, than could have been occasioned by a very
      great public calamity.

      It is in this manner that money has become, in all civilized nations, the
      universal instrument of commerce, by the intervention of which goods of
      all kinds are bought and sold, or exchanged for one another.

      What are the rules which men naturally observe, in exchanging them either
      for money, or for one another, I shall now proceed to examine. These rules
      determine what may be called the relative or exchangeable value of goods.

      The word VALUE, it is to be observed, has two different meanings, and
      sometimes expresses the utility of some particular object, and sometimes
      the power of purchasing other goods which the possession of that object
      conveys. The one may be called ‘value in use;’ the other, ‘value in
      exchange.’ The things which have the greatest value in use have frequently
      little or no value in exchange; and, on the contrary, those which have the
      greatest value in exchange have frequently little or no value in use.
      Nothing is more useful than water; but it will purchase scarce any thing;
      scarce any thing can be had in exchange for it. A diamond, on the
      contrary, has scarce any value in use; but a very great quantity of other
      goods may frequently be had in exchange for it.

      In order to investigate the principles which regulate the exchangeable
      value of commodities, I shall endeavour to shew,

      First, what is the real measure of this exchangeable value; or wherein
      consists the real price of all commodities.

      Secondly, what are the different parts of which this real price is
      composed or made up.
