The money price of labour, as I shall
      endeavour to shew hereafter, does not fluctuate from year to year with the
      money price of corn, but seems to be everywhere accommodated, not to the
      temporary or occasional, but to the average or ordinary price of that
      necessary of life. The average or ordinary price of corn, again is
      regulated, as I shall likewise endeavour to shew hereafter, by the value
      of silver, by the richness or barrenness of the mines which supply the
      market with that metal, or by the quantity of labour which must be
      employed, and consequently of corn which must be consumed, in order to
      bring any particular quantity of silver from the mine to the market. But
      the value of silver, though it sometimes varies greatly from century to
      century, seldom varies much from year to year, but frequently continues
      the same, or very nearly the same, for half a century or a century
      together. The ordinary or average money price of corn, therefore, may,
      during so long a period, continue the same, or very nearly the same, too,
      and along with it the money price of labour, provided, at least, the
      society continues, in other respects, in the same, or nearly in the same,
      condition. In the mean time, the temporary and occasional price of corn
      may frequently be double one year of what it had been the year before, or
      fluctuate, for example, from five-and-twenty to fifty shillings the
      quarter. But when corn is at the latter price, not only the nominal, but
      the real value of a corn rent, will be double of what it is when at the
      former, or will command double the quantity either of labour, or of the
      greater part of other commodities; the money price of labour, and along
      with it that of most other things, continuing the same during all these
      fluctuations.

      Labour, therefore, it appears evidently, is the only universal, as well as
      the only accurate, measure of value, or the only standard by which we can
      compare the values of different commodities, at all times, and at all
      places. We cannot estimate, it is allowed, the real value of different
      commodities from century to century by the quantities of silver which were
      given for them. We cannot estimate it from year to year by the quantities
      of corn. By the quantities of labour, we can, with the greatest accuracy,
      estimate it, both from century to century, and from year to year. From
      century to century, corn is a better measure than silver, because, from
      century to century, equal quantities of corn will command the same
      quantity of labour more nearly than equal quantities of silver. From year
      to year, on the contrary, silver is a better measure than corn, because
      equal quantities of it will more nearly command the same quantity of
      labour.

      But though, in establishing perpetual rents, or even in letting very long
      leases, it may be of use to distinguish between real and nominal price; it
      is of none in buying and selling, the more common and ordinary
      transactions of human life.

      At the same time and place, the real and the nominal price of all
      commodities are exactly in proportion to one another. The more or less
      money you get for any commodity, in the London market, for example, the
      more or less labour it will at that time and place enable you to purchase
      or command. At the same time and place, therefore, money is the exact
      measure of the real exchangeable value of all commodities. It is so,
      however, at the same time and place only.

      Though at distant places there is no regular proportion between the real
      and the money price of commodities, yet the merchant who carries goods
      from the one to the other, has nothing to consider but the money price, or
      the difference between the quantity of silver for which he buys them, and
      that for which he is likely to sell them. Half an ounce of silver at
      Canton in China may command a greater quantity both of labour and of the
      necessaries and conveniencies of life, than an ounce at London. A
      commodity, therefore, which sells for half an ounce of silver at Canton,
      may there be really dearer, of more real importance to the man who
      possesses it there, than a commodity which sells for an ounce at London is
      to the man who possesses it at London. If a London merchant, however, can
      buy at Canton, for half an ounce of silver, a commodity which he can
      afterwards sell at London for an ounce, he gains a hundred per cent. by
      the bargain, just as much as if an ounce of silver was at London exactly
      of the same value as at Canton. It is of no importance to him that half an
      ounce of silver at Canton would have given him the command of more labour,
      and of a greater quantity of the necessaries and conveniencies of life
      than an ounce can do at London. An ounce at London will always give him
      the command of double the quantity of all these, which half an ounce could
      have done there, and this is precisely what he wants.

      As it is the nominal or money price of goods, therefore, which finally
      determines the prudence or imprudence of all purchases and sales, and
      thereby regulates almost the whole business of common life in which price
      is concerned, we cannot wonder that it should have been so much more
      attended to than the real price.

      In such a work as this, however, it may sometimes be of use to compare the
      different real values of a particular commodity at different times and
      places, or the different degrees of power over the labour of other people
      which it may, upon different occasions, have given to those who possessed
      it. We must in this case compare, not so much the different quantities of
      silver for which it was commonly sold, as the different quantities or
      labour which those different quantities of silver could have purchased.
      But the current prices of labour, at distant times and places, can scarce
      ever be known with any degree of exactness. Those of corn, though they
      have in few places been regularly recorded, are in general better known,
      and have been more frequently taken notice of by historians and other
      writers. We must generally, therefore, content ourselves with them, not as
      being always exactly in the same proportion as the current prices of
      labour, but as being the nearest approximation which can commonly be had
      to that proportion. I shall hereafter have occasion to make several
      comparisons of this kind.

      In the progress of industry, commercial nations have found it convenient
      to coin several different metals into money; gold for larger payments,
      silver for purchases of moderate value, and copper, or some other coarse
      metal, for those of still smaller consideration, They have always,
      however, considered one of those metals as more peculiarly the measure of
      value than any of the other two; and this preference seems generally to
      have been given to the metal which they happen first to make use of as the
      instrument of commerce. Having once begun to use it as their standard,
      which they must have done when they had no other money, they have
      generally continued to do so even when the necessity was not the same.

      The Romans are said to have had nothing but copper money till within five
      years before the first Punic war (Pliny, lib. xxxiii. cap. 3), when they
      first began to coin silver. Copper, therefore, appears to have continued
      always the measure of value in that republic.
