At Rome all accounts appear
      to have been kept, and the value of all estates to have been computed,
      either in asses or in sestertii. The as was always the denomination of a
      copper coin. The word sestertius signifies two asses and a half. Though
      the sestertius, therefore, was originally a silver coin, its value was
      estimated in copper. At Rome, one who owed a great deal of money was said
      to have a great deal of other people’s copper.

      The northern nations who established themselves upon the ruins of the
      Roman empire, seem to have had silver money from the first beginning of
      their settlements, and not to have known either gold or copper coins for
      several ages thereafter. There were silver coins in England in the time of
      the Saxons; but there was little gold coined till the time of Edward III
      nor any copper till that of James I. of Great Britain. In England,
      therefore, and for the same reason, I believe, in all other modern nations
      of Europe, all accounts are kept, and the value of all goods and of all
      estates is generally computed, in silver: and when we mean to express the
      amount of a person’s fortune, we seldom mention the number of guineas, but
      the number of pounds sterling which we suppose would be given for it.

      Originally, in all countries, I believe, a legal tender of payment could
      be made only in the coin of that metal which was peculiarly considered as
      the standard or measure of value. In England, gold was not considered as a
      legal tender for a long time after it was coined into money. The
      proportion between the values of gold and silver money was not fixed by
      any public law or proclamation, but was left to be settled by the market.
      If a debtor offered payment in gold, the creditor might either reject such
      payment altogether, or accept of it at such a valuation of the gold as he
      and his debtor could agree upon. Copper is not at present a legal tender,
      except in the change of the smaller silver coins.

      In this state of things, the distinction between the metal which was the
      standard, and that which was not the standard, was something more than a
      nominal distinction.

      In process of time, and as people became gradually more familiar with the
      use of the different metals in coin, and consequently better acquainted
      with the proportion between their respective values, it has, in most
      countries, I believe, been found convenient to ascertain this proportion,
      and to declare by a public law, that a guinea, for example, of such a
      weight and fineness, should exchange for one-and-twenty shillings, or be a
      legal tender for a debt of that amount. In this state of things, and
      during the continuance of any one regulated proportion of this kind, the
      distinction between the metal, which is the standard, and that which is
      not the standard, becomes little more than a nominal distinction.

      In consequence of any change, however, in this regulated proportion, this
      distinction becomes, or at least seems to become, something more than
      nominal again. If the regulated value of a guinea, for example, was either
      reduced to twenty, or raised to two-and-twenty shillings, all accounts
      being kept, and almost all obligations for debt being expressed, in silver
      money, the greater part of payments could in either case be made with the
      same quantity of silver money as before; but would require very different
      quantities of gold money; a greater in the one case, and a smaller in the
      other. Silver would appear to be more invariable in its value than gold.
      Silver would appear to measure the value of gold, and gold would not
      appear to measure the value of silver. The value of gold would seem to
      depend upon the quantity of silver which it would exchange for, and the
      value of silver would not seem to depend upon the quantity of gold which
      it would exchange for. This difference, however, would be altogether owing
      to the custom of keeping accounts, and of expressing the amount of all
      great and small sums rather in silver than in gold money. One of Mr
      Drummond’s notes for five-and-twenty or fifty guineas would, after an
      alteration of this kind, be still payable with five-and-twenty or fifty
      guineas, in the same manner as before. It would, after such an alteration,
      be payable with the same quantity of gold as before, but with very
      different quantities of silver. In the payment of such a note, gold would
      appear to be more invariable in its value than silver. Gold would appear
      to measure the value of silver, and silver would not appear to measure the
      value of gold. If the custom of keeping accounts, and of expressing
      promissory-notes and other obligations for money, in this manner should
      ever become general, gold, and not silver, would be considered as the
      metal which was peculiarly the standard or measure of value.

      In reality, during the continuance of any one regulated proportion between
      the respective values of the different metals in coin, the value of the
      most precious metal regulates the value of the whole coin. Twelve copper
      pence contain half a pound avoirdupois of copper, of not the best quality,
      which, before it is coined, is seldom worth seven-pence in silver. But as,
      by the regulation, twelve such pence are ordered to exchange for a
      shilling, they are in the market considered as worth a shilling, and a
      shilling can at any time be had for them. Even before the late reformation
      of the gold coin of Great Britain, the gold, that part of it at least
      which circulated in London and its neighbourhood, was in general less
      degraded below its standard weight than the greater part of the silver.
      One-and-twenty worn and defaced shillings, however, were considered as
      equivalent to a guinea, which, perhaps, indeed, was worn and defaced too,
      but seldom so much so. The late regulations have brought the gold coin as
      near, perhaps, to its standard weight as it is possible to bring the
      current coin of any nation; and the order to receive no gold at the public
      offices but by weight, is likely to preserve it so, as long as that order
      is enforced. The silver coin still continues in the same worn and degraded
      state as before the reformation of the cold coin. In the market, however,
      one-and-twenty shillings of this degraded silver coin are still considered
      as worth a guinea of this excellent gold coin.

      The reformation of the gold coin has evidently raised the value of the
      silver coin which can be exchanged for it.

      In the English mint, a pound weight of gold is coined into forty-four
      guineas and a half, which at one-and-twenty shillings the guinea, is equal
      to forty-six pounds fourteen shillings and sixpence. An ounce of such gold
      coin, therefore, is worth £ 3:17:10½ in silver. In England, no duty or
      seignorage is paid upon the coinage, and he who carries a pound weight or
      an ounce weight of standard gold bullion to the mint, gets back a pound
      weight or an ounce weight of gold in coin, without any deduction. Three
      pounds seventeen shillings and tenpence halfpenny an ounce, therefore, is
      said to be the mint price of gold in England, or the quantity of gold coin
      which the mint gives in return for standard gold bullion.

      Before the reformation of the gold coin, the price of standard gold
      bullion in the market had, for many years, been upwards of £3:18s.
