They farm, the greater part of them, their own estates: and
      accordingly we seldom hear of the rent of a plantation, but frequently of
      its profit.

      Common farmers seldom employ any overseer to direct the general operations
      of the farm. They generally, too, work a good deal with their own hands,
      as ploughmen, harrowers, etc. What remains of the crop, after paying the
      rent, therefore, should not only replace to them their stock employed in
      cultivation, together with its ordinary profits, but pay them the wages
      which are due to them, both as labourers and overseers. Whatever remains,
      however, after paying the rent and keeping up the stock, is called profit.
      But wages evidently make a part of it. The farmer, by saving these wages,
      must necessarily gain them. Wages, therefore, are in this case confounded
      with profit.

      An independent manufacturer, who has stock enough both to purchase
      materials, and to maintain himself till he can carry his work to market,
      should gain both the wages of a journeyman who works under a master, and
      the profit which that master makes by the sale of that journeyman’s work.
      His whole gains, however, are commonly called profit, and wages are, in
      this case, too, confounded with profit.

      A gardener who cultivates his own garden with his own hands, unites in his
      own person the three different characters, of landlord, farmer, and
      labourer. His produce, therefore, should pay him the rent of the first,
      the profit of the second, and the wages of the third. The whole, however,
      is commonly considered as the earnings of his labour. Both rent and profit
      are, in this case, confounded with wages.

      As in a civilized country there are but few commodities of which the
      exchangeable value arises from labour only, rent and profit contributing
      largely to that of the far greater part of them, so the annual produce of
      its labour will always be sufficient to purchase or command a much greater
      quantity of labour than what was employed in raising, preparing, and
      bringing that produce to market. If the society were annually to employ
      all the labour which it can annually purchase, as the quantity of labour
      would increase greatly every year, so the produce of every succeeding year
      would be of vastly greater value than that of the foregoing. But there is
      no country in which the whole annual produce is employed in maintaining
      the industrious. The idle everywhere consume a great part of it; and,
      according to the different proportions in which it is annually divided
      between those two different orders of people, its ordinary or average
      value must either annually increase or diminish, or continue the same from
      one year to another.
