After remarking that negroes and
mulattoes enjoy an immunity from certain tropical diseases, he
observes, firstly, that all animals tend to vary in some degree, and,
secondly, that agriculturists improve their domesticated animals by
selection; and then, he adds, but what is done in this latter case “by
art, seems to be done with equal efficacy, though more slowly, by
nature, in the formation of varieties of mankind, fitted for the
country which they inhabit. Of the accidental varieties of man, which
would occur among the first few and scattered inhabitants of the middle
regions of Africa, some one would be better fitted than others to bear
the diseases of the country. This race would consequently multiply,
while the others would decrease; not only from their in ability to
sustain the attacks of disease, but from their incapacity of contending
with their more vigorous neighbours. The colour of this vigorous race I
take for granted, from what has been already said, would be dark. But
the same disposition to form varieties still existing, a darker and a
darker race would in the course of time occur: and as the darkest would
be the best fitted for the climate, this would at length become the
most prevalent, if not the only race, in the particular country in
which it had originated.” He then extends these same views to the white
inhabitants of colder climates. I am indebted to Mr. Rowley, of the
United States, for having called my attention, through Mr. Brace, to
the above passage of Dr. Wells’ work.

The Hon. and Rev. W. Herbert, afterward Dean of Manchester, in the
fourth volume of the “Horticultural Transactions”, 1822, and in his
work on the “Amaryllidaceæ” (1837, pages 19, 339), declares that
“horticultural experiments have established, beyond the possibility of
refutation, that botanical species are only a higher and more permanent
class of varieties.” He extends the same view to animals. The dean
believes that single species of each genus were created in an
originally highly plastic condition, and that these have produced,
chiefly by inter-crossing, but likewise by variation, all our existing
species.

In 1826 Professor Grant, in the concluding paragraph in his well-known
paper (“Edinburgh Philosophical Journal”, vol. XIV, page 283) on the
Spongilla, clearly declares his belief that species are descended from
other species, and that they become improved in the course of
modification. This same view was given in his Fifty-fifth Lecture,
published in the “Lancet” in 1834.

In 1831 Mr. Patrick Matthew published his work on “Naval Timber and
Arboriculture”, in which he gives precisely the same view on the origin
of species as that (presently to be alluded to) propounded by Mr.
Wallace and myself in the “Linnean Journal”, and as that enlarged in
the present volume. Unfortunately the view was given by Mr. Matthew
very briefly in scattered passages in an appendix to a work on a
different subject, so that it remained unnoticed until Mr. Matthew
himself drew attention to it in the “Gardeners’ Chronicle”, on April 7,
1860. The differences of Mr. Matthew’s views from mine are not of much
importance: he seems to consider that the world was nearly depopulated
at successive periods, and then restocked; and he gives as an
alternative, that new forms may be generated “without the presence of
any mold or germ of former aggregates.” I am not sure that I understand
some passages; but it seems that he attributes much influence to the
direct action of the conditions of life. He clearly saw, however, the
full force of the principle of natural selection.

The celebrated geologist and naturalist, Von Buch, in his excellent
“Description Physique des Isles Canaries” (1836, page 147), clearly
expresses his belief that varieties slowly become changed into
permanent species, which are no longer capable of intercrossing.

Rafinesque, in his “New Flora of North America”, published in 1836,
wrote (page 6) as follows: “All species might have been varieties once,
and many varieties are gradually becoming species by assuming constant
and peculiar characters;” but further on (page 18) he adds, “except the
original types or ancestors of the genus.”

In 1843-44 Professor Haldeman (“Boston Journal of Nat. Hist. U.
States”, vol. iv, page 468) has ably given the arguments for and
against the hypothesis of the development and modification of species:
he seems to lean toward the side of change.

The “Vestiges of Creation” appeared in 1844. In the tenth and much
improved edition (1853) the anonymous author says (page 155): “The
proposition determined on after much consideration is, that the several
series of animated beings, from the simplest and oldest up to the
highest and most recent, are, under the providence of God, the results,
_first_, of an impulse which has been imparted to the forms of life,
advancing them, in definite times, by generation, through grades of
organisation terminating in the highest dicotyledons and vertebrata,
these grades being few in number, and generally marked by intervals of
organic character, which we find to be a practical difficulty in
ascertaining affinities; _second_, of another impulse connected with
the vital forces, tending, in the course of generations, to modify
organic structures in accordance with external circumstances, as food,
the nature of the habitat, and the meteoric agencies, these being the
‘adaptations’ of the natural theologian.” The author apparently
believes that organisation progresses by sudden leaps, but that the
effects produced by the conditions of life are gradual. He argues with
much force on general grounds that species are not immutable
productions. But I cannot see how the two supposed “impulses” account
in a scientific sense for the numerous and beautiful coadaptations
which we see throughout nature; I cannot see that we thus gain any
insight how, for instance, a woodpecker has become adapted to its
peculiar habits of life. The work, from its powerful and brilliant
style, though displaying in the early editions little accurate
knowledge and a great want of scientific caution, immediately had a
very wide circulation. In my opinion it has done excellent service in
this country in calling attention to the subject, in removing
prejudice, and in thus preparing the ground for the reception of
analogous views.

In 1846 the veteran geologist M.J. d’Omalius d’Halloy published in an
excellent though short paper (“Bulletins de l’Acad. Roy. Bruxelles”,
tom. xiii, page 581) his opinion that it is more probable that new
species have been produced by descent with modification than that they
have been separately created: the author first promulgated this opinion
in 1831.

Professor Owen, in 1849 (“Nature of Limbs”, page 86), wrote as follows:
“The archetypal idea was manifested in the flesh under diverse such
modifications, upon this planet, long prior to the existence of those
animal species that actually exemplify it. To what natural laws or
secondary causes the orderly succession and progression of such organic
phenomena may have been committed, we, as yet, are ignorant.” In his
address to the British Association, in 1858, he speaks (page li) of
“the axiom of the continuous operation of creative power, or of the
ordained becoming of living things.” Further on (page xc), after
referring to geographical distribution, he adds, “These phenomena shake
our confidence in the conclusion that the Apteryx of New Zealand and
the Red Grouse of England were distinct creations in and for those
islands respectively.
