Always, also, it may be well to bear in mind that
by the word ‘creation’ the zoologist means ‘a process he knows not
what.’” He amplifies this idea by adding that when such cases as that
of the Red Grouse are “enumerated by the zoologist as evidence of
distinct creation of the bird in and for such islands, he chiefly
expresses that he knows not how the Red Grouse came to be there, and
there exclusively; signifying also, by this mode of expressing such
ignorance, his belief that both the bird and the islands owed their
origin to a great first Creative Cause.” If we interpret these
sentences given in the same address, one by the other, it appears that
this eminent philosopher felt in 1858 his confidence shaken that the
Apteryx and the Red Grouse first appeared in their respective homes “he
knew not how,” or by some process “he knew not what.”

This Address was delivered after the papers by Mr. Wallace and myself
on the Origin of Species, presently to be referred to, had been read
before the Linnean Society. When the first edition of this work was
published, I was so completely deceived, as were many others, by such
expressions as “the continuous operation of creative power,” that I
included Professor Owen with other palæontologists as being firmly
convinced of the immutability of species; but it appears (“Anat. of
Vertebrates”, vol. iii, page 796) that this was on my part a
preposterous error. In the last edition of this work I inferred, and
the inference still seems to me perfectly just, from a passage
beginning with the words “no doubt the type-form,” &c.(Ibid., vol. i,
page xxxv), that Professor Owen admitted that natural selection may
have done something in the formation of a new species; but this it
appears (Ibid., vol. iii. page 798) is inaccurate and without evidence.
I also gave some extracts from a correspondence between Professor Owen
and the editor of the “London Review”, from which it appeared manifest
to the editor as well as to myself, that Professor Owen claimed to have
promulgated the theory of natural selection before I had done so; and I
expressed my surprise and satisfaction at this announcement; but as far
as it is possible to understand certain recently published passages
(Ibid., vol. iii. page 798) I have either partially or wholly again
fallen into error. It is consolatory to me that others find Professor
Owen’s controversial writings as difficult to understand and to
reconcile with each other, as I do. As far as the mere enunciation of
the principle of natural selection is concerned, it is quite immaterial
whether or not Professor Owen preceded me, for both of us, as shown in
this historical sketch, were long ago preceded by Dr. Wells and Mr.
Matthews.

M. Isidore Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, in his lectures delivered in 1850
(of which a Résumé appeared in the “Revue et Mag. de Zoolog.”, Jan.,
1851), briefly gives his reason for believing that specific characters
“sont fixés, pour chaque espèce, tant qu’elle se perpétue au milieu des
mêmes circonstances: ils se modifient, si les circonstances ambiantes
viennent à changer. En résumé, _l’observation_ des animaux sauvages
démontre deja la variabilité _limitée_ des espèces. Les _expériences_
sur les animaux sauvages devenus domestiques, et sur les animaux
domestiques redevenus sauvages, la démontrent plus clairment encore.
Ces mêmes expériences prouvent, de plus, que les différences produites
peuvent être de _valeur générique_.” In his “Hist. Nat. Générale” (tom.
ii, page 430, 1859) he amplifies analogous conclusions.

From a circular lately issued it appears that Dr. Freke, in 1851
(“Dublin Medical Press”, page 322), propounded the doctrine that all
organic beings have descended from one primordial form. His grounds of
belief and treatment of the subject are wholly different from mine; but
as Dr. Freke has now (1861) published his Essay on the “Origin of
Species by means of Organic Affinity”, the difficult attempt to give
any idea of his views would be superfluous on my part.

Mr. Herbert Spencer, in an Essay (originally published in the “Leader”,
March, 1852, and republished in his “Essays”, in 1858), has contrasted
the theories of the Creation and the Development of organic beings with
remarkable skill and force. He argues from the analogy of domestic
productions, from the changes which the embryos of many species
undergo, from the difficulty of distinguishing species and varieties,
and from the principle of general gradation, that species have been
modified; and he attributes the modification to the change of
circumstances. The author (1855) has also treated Psychology on the
principle of the necessary acquirement of each mental power and
capacity by gradation.

In 1852 M. Naudin, a distinguished botanist, expressly stated, in an
admirable paper on the Origin of Species (“Revue Horticole”, page 102;
since partly republished in the “Nouvelles Archives du Muséum”, tom. i,
p. 171), his belief that species are formed in an analogous manner as
varieties are under cultivation; and the latter process he attributes
to man’s power of selection. But he does not show how selection acts
under nature. He believes, like Dean Herbert, that species, when
nascent, were more plastic than at present. He lays weight on what he
calls the principle of finality, “puissance mystérieuse, indéterminée;
fatalité pour les uns; pour les autres volonté providentielle, dont
l’action incessante sur les êtres vivantes détermine, à toutes les
époques de l’existence du monde, la forme, le volume, et la durée de
chacun d’eux, en raison de sa destinée dans l’ordre de choses dont il
fait partie. C’est cette puissance qui harmonise chaque membre à
l’ensemble, en l’appropriant à la fonction qu’il doit remplir dans
l’organisme général de la nature, fonction qui est pour lui sa raison
d’être.”[3]

 [3] From references in Bronn’s “Untersuchungen über die
 Entwickelungs-Gesetze”, it appears that the celebrated botanist and
 palæontologist Unger published, in 1852, his belief that species
 undergo development and modification. Dalton, likewise, in Pander and
 Dalton’s work on Fossil Sloths, expressed, in 1821, a similar belief.
 Similar views have, as is well known, been maintained by Oken in his
 mystical “Natur-Philosophie”. From other references in Godron’s work
 “Sur l’Espèce”, it seems that Bory St. Vincent, Burdach, Poiret and
 Fries, have all admitted that new species are continually being
 produced.
    I may add, that of the thirty-four authors named in this Historical
    Sketch, who believe in the modification of species, or at least
    disbelieve in separate acts of creation, twenty-seven have written
    on special branches of natural history or geology.


In 1853 a celebrated geologist, Count Keyserling (“Bulletin de la Soc.
Geolog.”, 2nd Ser., tom. x, page 357), suggested that as new diseases,
supposed to have been caused by some miasma have arisen and spread over
the world, so at certain periods the germs of existing species may have
been chemically affected by circumambient molecules of a particular
nature, and thus have given rise to new forms.

In this same year, 1853, Dr. Schaaffhausen published an excellent
pamphlet (“Verhand. des Naturhist. Vereins der Preuss. Rheinlands”,
&c.), in which he maintains the development of organic forms on the
earth. He infers that many species have kept true for long periods,
whereas a few have become modified. The distinction of species he
explains by the destruction of intermediate graduated forms. “Thus
living plants and animals are not separated from the extinct by new
creations, but are to be regarded as their descendants through
continued reproduction.”

A well-known French botanist, M. Lecoq, writes in 1854 (“Etudes sur
Géograph.” Bot. tom.
