i, page 250), “On voit que nos recherches sur la
fixité ou la variation de l’espéce, nous conduisent directement aux
idées émises par deux hommes justement célèbres, Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire
et Goethe.” Some other passages scattered through M. Lecoq’s large work
make it a little doubtful how far he extends his views on the
modification of species.

The “Philosophy of Creation” has been treated in a masterly manner by
the Rev. Baden Powell, in his “Essays on the Unity of Worlds”, 1855.
Nothing can be more striking than the manner in which he shows that the
introduction of new species is “a regular, not a casual phenomenon,”
or, as Sir John Herschel expresses it, “a natural in contradistinction
to a miraculous process.”

The third volume of the “Journal of the Linnean Society” contains
papers, read July 1, 1858, by Mr. Wallace and myself, in which, as
stated in the introductory remarks to this volume, the theory of
Natural Selection is promulgated by Mr. Wallace with admirable force
and clearness.

Von Baer, toward whom all zoologists feel so profound a respect,
expressed about the year 1859 (see Prof. Rudolph Wagner,
“Zoologisch-Anthropologische Untersuchungen”, 1861, s. 51) his
conviction, chiefly grounded on the laws of geographical distribution,
that forms now perfectly distinct have descended from a single
parent-form.

In June, 1859, Professor Huxley gave a lecture before the Royal
Institution on the ‘Persistent Types of Animal Life’. Referring to such
cases, he remarks, “It is difficult to comprehend the meaning of such
facts as these, if we suppose that each species of animal and plant, or
each great type of organisation, was formed and placed upon the surface
of the globe at long intervals by a distinct act of creative power; and
it is well to recollect that such an assumption is as unsupported by
tradition or revelation as it is opposed to the general analogy of
nature. If, on the other hand, we view ‘Persistent Types’ in relation
to that hypothesis which supposes the species living at any time to be
the result of the gradual modification of pre-existing species, a
hypothesis which, though unproven, and sadly damaged by some of its
supporters, is yet the only one to which physiology lends any
countenance; their existence would seem to show that the amount of
modification which living beings have undergone during geological time
is but very small in relation to the whole series of changes which they
have suffered.”

In December, 1859, Dr. Hooker published his “Introduction to the
Australian Flora”. In the first part of this great work he admits the
truth of the descent and modification of species, and supports this
doctrine by many original observations.

The first edition of this work was published on November 24, 1859, and
the second edition on January 7, 1860.




Contents


AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE PROGRESS OF OPINION ON THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES
INTRODUCTION.
