In the five succeeding chapters, the most apparent and
gravest difficulties in accepting the theory will be given: namely,
first, the difficulties of transitions, or how a simple being or a
simple organ can be changed and perfected into a highly developed being
or into an elaborately constructed organ; secondly the subject of
instinct, or the mental powers of animals; thirdly, hybridism, or the
infertility of species and the fertility of varieties when
intercrossed; and fourthly, the imperfection of the geological record.
In the next chapter I shall consider the geological succession of
organic beings throughout time; in the twelfth and thirteenth, their
geographical distribution throughout space; in the fourteenth, their
classification or mutual affinities, both when mature and in an
embryonic condition. In the last chapter I shall give a brief
recapitulation of the whole work, and a few concluding remarks.

No one ought to feel surprise at much remaining as yet unexplained in
regard to the origin of species and varieties, if he make due allowance
for our profound ignorance in regard to the mutual relations of the
many beings which live around us. Who can explain why one species
ranges widely and is very numerous, and why another allied species has
a narrow range and is rare? Yet these relations are of the highest
importance, for they determine the present welfare and, as I believe,
the future success and modification of every inhabitant of this world.
Still less do we know of the mutual relations of the innumerable
inhabitants of the world during the many past geological epochs in its
history. Although much remains obscure, and will long remain obscure, I
can entertain no doubt, after the most deliberate study and
dispassionate judgment of which I am capable, that the view which most
naturalists until recently entertained, and which I formerly
entertained—namely, that each species has been independently created—is
erroneous. I am fully convinced that species are not immutable; but
that those belonging to what are called the same genera are lineal
descendants of some other and generally extinct species, in the same
manner as the acknowledged varieties of any one species are the
descendants of that species. Furthermore, I am convinced that natural
selection has been the most important, but not the exclusive, means of
modification.
