These remarks
are of course confined to the first _appearance_ of the peculiarity,
and not to the primary cause which may have acted on the ovules or on
the male element; in nearly the same manner as the increased length of
the horns in the offspring from a short-horned cow by a long-horned
bull, though appearing late in life, is clearly due to the male
element.

Having alluded to the subject of reversion, I may here refer to a
statement often made by naturalists—namely, that our domestic
varieties, when run wild, gradually but invariably revert in character
to their aboriginal stocks. Hence it has been argued that no deductions
can be drawn from domestic races to species in a state of nature. I
have in vain endeavoured to discover on what decisive facts the above
statement has so often and so boldly been made. There would be great
difficulty in proving its truth: we may safely conclude that very many
of the most strongly marked domestic varieties could not possibly live
in a wild state. In many cases we do not know what the aboriginal stock
was, and so could not tell whether or not nearly perfect reversion had
ensued. It would be necessary, in order to prevent the effects of
intercrossing, that only a single variety should be turned loose in its
new home. Nevertheless, as our varieties certainly do occasionally
revert in some of their characters to ancestral forms, it seems to me
not improbable that if we could succeed in naturalising, or were to
cultivate, during many generations, the several races, for instance, of
the cabbage, in very poor soil—in which case, however, some effect
would have to be attributed to the _definite_ action of the poor
soil—that they would, to a large extent, or even wholly, revert to the
wild aboriginal stock. Whether or not the experiment would succeed is
not of great importance for our line of argument; for by the experiment
itself the conditions of life are changed. If it could be shown that
our domestic varieties manifested a strong tendency to reversion—that
is, to lose their acquired characters, while kept under the same
conditions and while kept in a considerable body, so that free
intercrossing might check, by blending together, any slight deviations
in their structure, in such case, I grant that we could deduce nothing
from domestic varieties in regard to species. But there is not a shadow
of evidence in favour of this view: to assert that we could not breed
our cart and race-horses, long and short-horned cattle, and poultry of
various breeds, and esculent vegetables, for an unlimited number of
generations, would be opposed to all experience.

_Character of Domestic Varieties; difficulty of distinguishing between
Varieties and Species; origin of Domestic Varieties from one or more
Species._


When we look to the hereditary varieties or races of our domestic
animals and plants, and compare them with closely allied species, we
generally perceive in each domestic race, as already remarked, less
uniformity of character than in true species. Domestic races often have
a somewhat monstrous character; by which I mean, that, although
differing from each other and from other species of the same genus, in
several trifling respects, they often differ in an extreme degree in
some one part, both when compared one with another, and more especially
when compared with the species under nature to which they are nearest
allied. With these exceptions (and with that of the perfect fertility
of varieties when crossed—a subject hereafter to be discussed),
domestic races of the same species differ from each other in the same
manner as do the closely allied species of the same genus in a state of
nature, but the differences in most cases are less in degree. This must
be admitted as true, for the domestic races of many animals and plants
have been ranked by some competent judges as the descendants of
aboriginally distinct species, and by other competent judges as mere
varieties. If any well marked distinction existed between a domestic
race and a species, this source of doubt would not so perpetually
recur. It has often been stated that domestic races do not differ from
each other in characters of generic value. It can be shown that this
statement is not correct; but naturalists differ much in determining
what characters are of generic value; all such valuations being at
present empirical. When it is explained how genera originate under
nature, it will be seen that we have no right to expect often to find a
generic amount of difference in our domesticated races.

In attempting to estimate the amount of structural difference between
allied domestic races, we are soon involved in doubt, from not knowing
whether they are descended from one or several parent species. This
point, if it could be cleared up, would be interesting; if, for
instance, it could be shown that the greyhound, bloodhound, terrier,
spaniel and bull-dog, which we all know propagate their kind truly,
were the offspring of any single species, then such facts would have
great weight in making us doubt about the immutability of the many
closely allied natural species—for instance, of the many
foxes—inhabiting the different quarters of the world. I do not believe,
as we shall presently see, that the whole amount of difference between
the several breeds of the dog has been produced under domestication; I
believe that a small part of the difference is due to their being
descended from distinct species. In the case of strongly marked races
of some other domesticated species, there is presumptive or even strong
evidence that all are descended from a single wild stock.

It has often been assumed that man has chosen for domestication animals
and plants having an extraordinary inherent tendency to vary, and
likewise to withstand diverse climates. I do not dispute that these
capacities have added largely to the value of most of our domesticated
productions; but how could a savage possibly know, when he first tamed
an animal, whether it would vary in succeeding generations, and whether
it would endure other climates? Has the little variability of the ass
and goose, or the small power of endurance of warmth by the reindeer,
or of cold by the common camel, prevented their domestication? I cannot
doubt that if other animals and plants, equal in number to our
domesticated productions, and belonging to equally diverse classes and
countries, were taken from a state of nature, and could be made to
breed for an equal number of generations under domestication, they
would on an average vary as largely as the parent species of our
existing domesticated productions have varied.

In the case of most of our anciently domesticated animals and plants,
it is not possible to come to any definite conclusion, whether they are
descended from one or several wild species. The argument mainly relied
on by those who believe in the multiple origin of our domestic animals
is, that we find in the most ancient times, on the monuments of Egypt,
and in the lake-habitations of Switzerland, much diversity in the
breeds; and that some of these ancient breeds closely resemble, or are
even identical with, those still existing. But this only throws far
backward the history of civilisation, and shows that animals were
domesticated at a much earlier period than has hitherto been supposed.
The lake-inhabitants of Switzerland cultivated several kinds of wheat
and barley, the pea, the poppy for oil and flax; and they possessed
several domesticated animals. They also carried on commerce with other
nations.
