The size and shape of
the apertures in the sternum are highly variable; so is the degree of
divergence and relative size of the two arms of the furcula. The
proportional width of the gape of mouth, the proportional length of the
eyelids, of the orifice of the nostrils, of the tongue (not always in
strict correlation with the length of beak), the size of the crop and
of the upper part of the œsophagus; the development and abortion of the
oil-gland; the number of the primary wing and caudal feathers; the
relative length of the wing and tail to each other and to the body; the
relative length of the leg and foot; the number of scutellæ on the
toes, the development of skin between the toes, are all points of
structure which are variable. The period at which the perfect plumage
is acquired varies, as does the state of the down with which the
nestling birds are clothed when hatched. The shape and size of the eggs
vary. The manner of flight, and in some breeds the voice and
disposition, differ remarkably. Lastly, in certain breeds, the males
and females have come to differ in a slight degree from each other.

Altogether at least a score of pigeons might be chosen, which, if shown
to an ornithologist, and he were told that they were wild birds, would
certainly be ranked by him as well-defined species. Moreover, I do not
believe that any ornithologist would in this case place the English
carrier, the short-faced tumbler, the runt, the barb, pouter, and
fantail in the same genus; more especially as in each of these breeds
several truly-inherited sub-breeds, or species, as he would call them,
could be shown him.

Great as are the differences between the breeds of the pigeon, I am
fully convinced that the common opinion of naturalists is correct,
namely, that all are descended from the rock-pigeon (Columba livia),
including under this term several geographical races or sub-species,
which differ from each other in the most trifling respects. As several
of the reasons which have led me to this belief are in some degree
applicable in other cases, I will here briefly give them. If the
several breeds are not varieties, and have not proceeded from the
rock-pigeon, they must have descended from at least seven or eight
aboriginal stocks; for it is impossible to make the present domestic
breeds by the crossing of any lesser number: how, for instance, could a
pouter be produced by crossing two breeds unless one of the
parent-stocks possessed the characteristic enormous crop? The supposed
aboriginal stocks must all have been rock-pigeons, that is, they did
not breed or willingly perch on trees. But besides C. livia, with its
geographical sub-species, only two or three other species of
rock-pigeons are known; and these have not any of the characters of the
domestic breeds. Hence the supposed aboriginal stocks must either still
exist in the countries where they were originally domesticated, and yet
be unknown to ornithologists; and this, considering their size, habits
and remarkable characters, seems improbable; or they must have become
extinct in the wild state. But birds breeding on precipices, and good
flyers, are unlikely to be exterminated; and the common rock-pigeon,
which has the same habits with the domestic breeds, has not been
exterminated even on several of the smaller British islets, or on the
shores of the Mediterranean. Hence the supposed extermination of so
many species having similar habits with the rock-pigeon seems a very
rash assumption. Moreover, the several above-named domesticated breeds
have been transported to all parts of the world, and, therefore, some
of them must have been carried back again into their native country;
but not one has become wild or feral, though the dovecot-pigeon, which
is the rock-pigeon in a very slightly altered state, has become feral
in several places. Again, all recent experience shows that it is
difficult to get wild animals to breed freely under domestication; yet
on the hypothesis of the multiple origin of our pigeons, it must be
assumed that at least seven or eight species were so thoroughly
domesticated in ancient times by half-civilized man, as to be quite
prolific under confinement.

An argument of great weight, and applicable in several other cases, is,
that the above-specified breeds, though agreeing generally with the
wild rock-pigeon in constitution, habits, voice, colouring, and in most
parts of their structure, yet are certainly highly abnormal in other
parts; we may look in vain through the whole great family of Columbidæ
for a beak like that of the English carrier, or that of the short-faced
tumbler, or barb; for reversed feathers like those of the Jacobin; for
a crop like that of the pouter; for tail-feathers like those of the
fantail. Hence it must be assumed, not only that half-civilized man
succeeded in thoroughly domesticating several species, but that he
intentionally or by chance picked out extraordinarily abnormal species;
and further, that these very species have since all become extinct or
unknown. So many strange contingencies are improbable in the highest
degree.

Some facts in regard to the colouring of pigeons well deserve
consideration. The rock-pigeon is of a slaty-blue, with white loins;
but the Indian sub-species, C. intermedia of Strickland, has this part
bluish. The tail has a terminal dark bar, with the outer feathers
externally edged at the base with white. The wings have two black bars.
Some semi-domestic breeds, and some truly wild breeds, have, besides
the two black bars, the wings chequered with black. These several marks
do not occur together in any other species of the whole family. Now, in
every one of the domestic breeds, taking thoroughly well-bred birds,
all the above marks, even to the white edging of the outer
tail-feathers, sometimes concur perfectly developed. Moreover, when
birds belonging to two or more distinct breeds are crossed, none of
which are blue or have any of the above-specified marks, the mongrel
offspring are very apt suddenly to acquire these characters. To give
one instance out of several which I have observed: I crossed some white
fantails, which breed very true, with some black barbs—and it so
happens that blue varieties of barbs are so rare that I never heard of
an instance in England; and the mongrels were black, brown and mottled.
I also crossed a barb with a spot, which is a white bird with a red
tail and red spot on the forehead, and which notoriously breeds very
true; the mongrels were dusky and mottled. I then crossed one of the
mongrel barb-fantails with a mongrel barb-spot, and they produced a
bird of as beautiful a blue colour, with the white loins, double black
wing-bar, and barred and white-edged tail-feathers, as any wild
rock-pigeon! We can understand these facts, on the well-known principle
of reversion to ancestral characters, if all the domestic breeds are
descended from the rock-pigeon. But if we deny this, we must make one
of the two following highly improbable suppositions. Either, first,
that all the several imagined aboriginal stocks were coloured and
marked like the rock-pigeon, although no other existing species is thus
coloured and marked, so that in each separate breed there might be a
tendency to revert to the very same colours and markings. Or, secondly,
that each breed, even the purest, has within a dozen, or at most within
a score, of generations, been crossed by the rock-pigeon: I say within
a dozen or twenty generations, for no instance is known of crossed
descendants reverting to an ancestor of foreign blood, removed by a
greater number of generations.
