In a breed which has been crossed only
once the tendency to revert to any character derived from such a cross
will naturally become less and less, as in each succeeding generation
there will be less of the foreign blood; but when there has been no
cross, and there is a tendency in the breed to revert to a character
which was lost during some former generation, this tendency, for all
that we can see to the contrary, may be transmitted undiminished for an
indefinite number of generations. These two distinct cases of reversion
are often confounded together by those who have written on inheritance.

Lastly, the hybrids or mongrels from between all the breeds of the
pigeon are perfectly fertile, as I can state from my own observations,
purposely made, on the most distinct breeds. Now, hardly any cases have
been ascertained with certainty of hybrids from two quite distinct
species of animals being perfectly fertile. Some authors believe that
long-continued domestication eliminates this strong tendency to
sterility in species. From the history of the dog, and of some other
domestic animals, this conclusion is probably quite correct, if applied
to species closely related to each other. But to extend it so far as to
suppose that species, aboriginally as distinct as carriers, tumblers,
pouters, and fantails now are, should yield offspring perfectly
fertile, _inter se_, seems to me rash in the extreme.

From these several reasons, namely, the improbability of man having
formerly made seven or eight supposed species of pigeons to breed
freely under domestication—these supposed species being quite unknown
in a wild state, and their not having become anywhere feral—these
species presenting certain very abnormal characters, as compared with
all other Columbidæ, though so like the rock-pigeon in most other
respects—the occasional reappearance of the blue colour and various
black marks in all the breeds, both when kept pure and when crossed—and
lastly, the mongrel offspring being perfectly fertile—from these
several reasons, taken together, we may safely conclude that all our
domestic breeds are descended from the rock-pigeon or Columba livia
with its geographical sub-species.

In favour of this view, I may add, firstly, that the wild C. livia has
been found capable of domestication in Europe and in India; and that it
agrees in habits and in a great number of points of structure with all
the domestic breeds. Secondly, that although an English carrier or a
short-faced tumbler differs immensely in certain characters from the
rock-pigeon, yet that by comparing the several sub-breeds of these two
races, more especially those brought from distant countries, we can
make, between them and the rock-pigeon, an almost perfect series; so we
can in some other cases, but not with all the breeds. Thirdly, those
characters which are mainly distinctive of each breed are in each
eminently variable, for instance, the wattle and length of beak of the
carrier, the shortness of that of the tumbler, and the number of
tail-feathers in the fantail; and the explanation of this fact will be
obvious when we treat of selection. Fourthly, pigeons have been watched
and tended with the utmost care, and loved by many people. They have
been domesticated for thousands of years in several quarters of the
world; the earliest known record of pigeons is in the fifth Ægyptian
dynasty, about 3000 B.C., as was pointed out to me by Professor
Lepsius; but Mr. Birch informs me that pigeons are given in a bill of
fare in the previous dynasty. In the time of the Romans, as we hear
from Pliny, immense prices were given for pigeons; “nay, they are come
to this pass, that they can reckon up their pedigree and race.” Pigeons
were much valued by Akber Khan in India, about the year 1600; never
less than 20,000 pigeons were taken with the court. “The monarchs of
Iran and Turan sent him some very rare birds;” and, continues the
courtly historian, “His Majesty, by crossing the breeds, which method
was never practised before, has improved them astonishingly.” About
this same period the Dutch were as eager about pigeons as were the old
Romans. The paramount importance of these considerations in explaining
the immense amount of variation which pigeons have undergone, will
likewise be obvious when we treat of Selection. We shall then, also,
see how it is that the several breeds so often have a somewhat
monstrous character. It is also a most favourable circumstance for the
production of distinct breeds, that male and female pigeons can be
easily mated for life; and thus different breeds can be kept together
in the same aviary.

I have discussed the probable origin of domestic pigeons at some, yet
quite insufficient, length; because when I first kept pigeons and
watched the several kinds, well knowing how truly they breed, I felt
fully as much difficulty in believing that since they had been
domesticated they had all proceeded from a common parent, as any
naturalist could in coming to a similar conclusion in regard to the
many species of finches, or other groups of birds, in nature. One
circumstance has struck me much; namely, that nearly all the breeders
of the various domestic animals and the cultivators of plants, with
whom I have conversed, or whose treatises I have read, are firmly
convinced that the several breeds to which each has attended, are
descended from so many aboriginally distinct species. Ask, as I have
asked, a celebrated raiser of Hereford cattle, whether his cattle might
not have descended from Long-horns, or both from a common parent-stock,
and he will laugh you to scorn. I have never met a pigeon, or poultry,
or duck, or rabbit fancier, who was not fully convinced that each main
breed was descended from a distinct species. Van Mons, in his treatise
on pears and apples, shows how utterly he disbelieves that the several
sorts, for instance a Ribston-pippin or Codlin-apple, could ever have
proceeded from the seeds of the same tree. Innumerable other examples
could be given. The explanation, I think, is simple: from
long-continued study they are strongly impressed with the differences
between the several races; and though they well know that each race
varies slightly, for they win their prizes by selecting such slight
differences, yet they ignore all general arguments, and refuse to sum
up in their minds slight differences accumulated during many successive
generations. May not those naturalists who, knowing far less of the
laws of inheritance than does the breeder, and knowing no more than he
does of the intermediate links in the long lines of descent, yet admit
that many of our domestic races are descended from the same parents—may
they not learn a lesson of caution, when they deride the idea of
species in a state of nature being lineal descendants of other species?

_Principles of Selection anciently followed, and their Effects._


Let us now briefly consider the steps by which domestic races have been
produced, either from one or from several allied species. Some effect
may be attributed to the direct and definite action of the external
conditions of life, and some to habit; but he would be a bold man who
would account by such agencies for the differences between a dray and
race-horse, a greyhound and bloodhound, a carrier and tumbler pigeon.
One of the most remarkable features in our domesticated races is that
we see in them adaptation, not indeed to the animal’s or plant’s own
good, but to man’s use or fancy. Some variations useful to him have
probably arisen suddenly, or by one step; many botanists, for instance,
believe that the fuller’s teasel, with its hooks, which can not be
rivalled by any mechanical contrivance, is only a variety of the wild
Dipsacus; and this amount of change may have suddenly arisen in a
seedling.
