This, perhaps, partly explains why the
varieties kept by savages, as has been remarked by some authors, have
more of the character of true species than the varieties kept in
civilised countries.

On the view here given of the important part which selection by man has
played, it becomes at once obvious, how it is that our domestic races
show adaptation in their structure or in their habits to man’s wants or
fancies. We can, I think, further understand the frequently abnormal
character of our domestic races, and likewise their differences being
so great in external characters, and relatively so slight in internal
parts or organs. Man can hardly select, or only with much difficulty,
any deviation of structure excepting such as is externally visible; and
indeed he rarely cares for what is internal. He can never act by
selection, excepting on variations which are first given to him in some
slight degree by nature. No man would ever try to make a fantail till
he saw a pigeon with a tail developed in some slight degree in an
unusual manner, or a pouter till he saw a pigeon with a crop of
somewhat unusual size; and the more abnormal or unusual any character
was when it first appeared, the more likely it would be to catch his
attention. But to use such an expression as trying to make a fantail
is, I have no doubt, in most cases, utterly incorrect. The man who
first selected a pigeon with a slightly larger tail, never dreamed what
the descendants of that pigeon would become through long-continued,
partly unconscious and partly methodical, selection. Perhaps the parent
bird of all fantails had only fourteen tail-feathers somewhat expanded,
like the present Java fantail, or like individuals of other and
distinct breeds, in which as many as seventeen tail-feathers have been
counted. Perhaps the first pouter-pigeon did not inflate its crop much
more than the turbit now does the upper part of its œsophagus—a habit
which is disregarded by all fanciers, as it is not one of the points of
the breed.

Nor let it be thought that some great deviation of structure would be
necessary to catch the fancier’s eye: he perceives extremely small
differences, and it is in human nature to value any novelty, however
slight, in one’s own possession. Nor must the value which would
formerly have been set on any slight differences in the individuals of
the same species, be judged of by the value which is now set on them,
after several breeds have fairly been established. It is known that
with pigeons many slight variations now occasionally appear, but these
are rejected as faults or deviations from the standard of perfection in
each breed. The common goose has not given rise to any marked
varieties; hence the Toulouse and the common breed, which differ only
in colour, that most fleeting of characters, have lately been exhibited
as distinct at our poultry-shows.

These views appear to explain what has sometimes been noticed, namely,
that we know hardly anything about the origin or history of any of our
domestic breeds. But, in fact, a breed, like a dialect of a language,
can hardly be said to have a distinct origin. A man preserves and
breeds from an individual with some slight deviation of structure, or
takes more care than usual in matching his best animals, and thus
improves them, and the improved animals slowly spread in the immediate
neighbourhood. But they will as yet hardly have a distinct name, and
from being only slightly valued, their history will have been
disregarded. When further improved by the same slow and gradual
process, they will spread more widely, and will be recognised as
something distinct and valuable, and will then probably first receive a
provincial name. In semi-civilised countries, with little free
communication, the spreading of a new sub-breed will be a slow process.
As soon as the points of value are once acknowledged, the principle, as
I have called it, of unconscious selection will always tend—perhaps
more at one period than at another, as the breed rises or falls in
fashion—perhaps more in one district than in another, according to the
state of civilisation of the inhabitants—slowly to add to the
characteristic features of the breed, whatever they may be. But the
chance will be infinitely small of any record having been preserved of
such slow, varying, and insensible changes.

_Circumstances favourable to Man’s Power of Selection._


I will now say a few words on the circumstances, favourable or the
reverse, to man’s power of selection. A high degree of variability is
obviously favourable, as freely giving the materials for selection to
work on; not that mere individual differences are not amply sufficient,
with extreme care, to allow of the accumulation of a large amount of
modification in almost any desired direction. But as variations
manifestly useful or pleasing to man appear only occasionally, the
chance of their appearance will be much increased by a large number of
individuals being kept. Hence number is of the highest importance for
success. On this principle Marshall formerly remarked, with respect to
the sheep of part of Yorkshire, “As they generally belong to poor
people, and are mostly _in small lots_, they never can be improved.” On
the other hand, nurserymen, from keeping large stocks of the same
plant, are generally far more successful than amateurs in raising new
and valuable varieties. A large number of individuals of an animal or
plant can be reared only where the conditions for its propagation are
favourable. When the individuals are scanty all will be allowed to
breed, whatever their quality may be, and this will effectually prevent
selection. But probably the most important element is that the animal
or plant should be so highly valued by man, that the closest attention
is paid to even the slightest deviations in its qualities or structure.
Unless such attention be paid nothing can be effected. I have seen it
gravely remarked, that it was most fortunate that the strawberry began
to vary just when gardeners began to attend to this plant. No doubt the
strawberry had always varied since it was cultivated, but the slight
varieties had been neglected. As soon, however, as gardeners picked out
individual plants with slightly larger, earlier, or better fruit, and
raised seedlings from them, and again picked out the best seedlings and
bred from them, then (with some aid by crossing distinct species) those
many admirable varieties of the strawberry were raised which have
appeared during the last half-century.

With animals, facility in preventing crosses is an important element in
the formation of new races—at least, in a country which is already
stocked with other races. In this respect enclosure of the land plays a
part. Wandering savages or the inhabitants of open plains rarely
possess more than one breed of the same species. Pigeons can be mated
for life, and this is a great convenience to the fancier, for thus many
races may be improved and kept true, though mingled in the same aviary;
and this circumstance must have largely favoured the formation of new
breeds. Pigeons, I may add, can be propagated in great numbers and at a
very quick rate, and inferior birds may be freely rejected, as when
killed they serve for food. On the other hand, cats, from their
nocturnal rambling habits, can not be easily matched, and, although so
much valued by women and children, we rarely see a distinct breed long
kept up; such breeds as we do sometimes see are almost always imported
from some other country.
