CHAPTER II.
VARIATION UNDER NATURE.


Variability—Individual differences—Doubtful species—Wide ranging, much
diffused, and common species, vary most—Species of the larger genera in
each country vary more frequently than the species of the smaller
genera—Many of the species of the larger genera resemble varieties in
being very closely, but unequally, related to each other, and in having
restricted ranges.


Before applying the principles arrived at in the last chapter to
organic beings in a state of nature, we must briefly discuss whether
these latter are subject to any variation. To treat this subject
properly, a long catalogue of dry facts ought to be given; but these I
shall reserve for a future work. Nor shall I here discuss the various
definitions which have been given of the term species. No one
definition has satisfied all naturalists; yet every naturalist knows
vaguely what he means when he speaks of a species. Generally the term
includes the unknown element of a distinct act of creation. The term
“variety” is almost equally difficult to define; but here community of
descent is almost universally implied, though it can rarely be proved.
We have also what are called monstrosities; but they graduate into
varieties. By a monstrosity I presume is meant some considerable
deviation of structure, generally injurious, or not useful to the
species. Some authors use the term “variation” in a technical sense, as
implying a modification directly due to the physical conditions of
life; and “variations” in this sense are supposed not to be inherited;
but who can say that the dwarfed condition of shells in the brackish
waters of the Baltic, or dwarfed plants on Alpine summits, or the
thicker fur of an animal from far northwards, would not in some cases
be inherited for at least a few generations? And in this case I presume
that the form would be called a variety.

It may be doubted whether sudden and considerable deviations of
structure, such as we occasionally see in our domestic productions,
more especially with plants, are ever permanently propagated in a state
of nature. Almost every part of every organic being is so beautifully
related to its complex conditions of life that it seems as improbable
that any part should have been suddenly produced perfect, as that a
complex machine should have been invented by man in a perfect state.
Under domestication monstrosities sometimes occur which resemble normal
structures in widely different animals. Thus pigs have occasionally
been born with a sort of proboscis, and if any wild species of the same
genus had naturally possessed a proboscis, it might have been argued
that this had appeared as a monstrosity; but I have as yet failed to
find, after diligent search, cases of monstrosities resembling normal
structures in nearly allied forms, and these alone bear on the
question. If monstrous forms of this kind ever do appear in a state of
nature and are capable of reproduction (which is not always the case),
as they occur rarely and singly, their preservation would depend on
unusually favourable circumstances. They would, also, during the first
and succeeding generations cross with the ordinary form, and thus their
abnormal character would almost inevitably be lost. But I shall have to
return in a future chapter to the preservation and perpetuation of
single or occasional variations.

_Individual Differences._


The many slight differences which appear in the offspring from the same
parents, or which it may be presumed have thus arisen, from being
observed in the individuals of the same species inhabiting the same
confined locality, may be called individual differences. No one
supposes that all the individuals of the same species are cast in the
same actual mould. These individual differences are of the highest
importance for us, for they are often inherited, as must be familiar to
every one; and they thus afford materials for natural selection to act
on and accumulate, in the same manner as man accumulates in any given
direction individual differences in his domesticated productions. These
individual differences generally affect what naturalists consider
unimportant parts; but I could show, by a long catalogue of facts, that
parts which must be called important, whether viewed under a
physiological or classificatory point of view, sometimes vary in the
individuals of the same species. I am convinced that the most
experienced naturalist would be surprised at the number of the cases of
variability, even in important parts of structure, which he could
collect on good authority, as I have collected, during a course of
years. It should be remembered that systematists are far from being
pleased at finding variability in important characters, and that there
are not many men who will laboriously examine internal and important
organs, and compare them in many specimens of the same species. It
would never have been expected that the branching of the main nerves
close to the great central ganglion of an insect would have been
variable in the same species; it might have been thought that changes
of this nature could have been effected only by slow degrees; yet Sir
J. Lubbock has shown a degree of variability in these main nerves in
Coccus, which may almost be compared to the irregular branching of the
stem of a tree. This philosophical naturalist, I may add, has also
shown that the muscles in the larvæ of certain insects are far from
uniform. Authors sometimes argue in a circle when they state that
important organs never vary; for these same authors practically rank
those parts as important (as some few naturalists have honestly
confessed) which do not vary; and, under this point of view, no
instance will ever be found of an important part varying; but under any
other point of view many instances assuredly can be given.

There is one point connected with individual differences which is
extremely perplexing: I refer to those genera which have been called
“protean” or “polymorphic,” in which species present an inordinate
amount of variation. With respect to many of these forms, hardly two
naturalists agree whether to rank them as species or as varieties. We
may instance Rubus, Rosa, and Hieracium among plants, several genera of
insects, and of Brachiopod shells. In most polymorphic genera some of
the species have fixed and definite characters. Genera which are
polymorphic in one country seem to be, with a few exceptions,
polymorphic in other countries, and likewise, judging from Brachiopod
shells, at former periods of time. These facts are very perplexing, for
they seem to show that this kind of variability is independent of the
conditions of life. I am inclined to suspect that we see, at least in
some of these polymorphic genera, variations which are of no service or
disservice to the species, and which consequently have not been seized
on and rendered definite by natural selection, as hereafter to be
explained.

Individuals of the same species often present, as is known to every
one, great differences of structure, independently of variation, as in
the two sexes of various animals, in the two or three castes of sterile
females or workers among insects, and in the immature and larval states
of many of the lower animals. There are, also, cases of dimorphism and
trimorphism, both with animals and plants. Thus, Mr. Wallace, who has
lately called attention to the subject, has shown that the females of
certain species of butterflies, in the Malayan Archipelago, regularly
appear under two or even three conspicuously distinct forms, not
connected by intermediate varieties.
