Fritz Müller has described
analogous but more extraordinary cases with the males of certain
Brazilian Crustaceans: thus, the male of a Tanais regularly occurs
under two distinct forms; one of these has strong and differently
shaped pincers, and the other has antennæ much more abundantly
furnished with smelling-hairs. Although in most of these cases, the two
or three forms, both with animals and plants, are not now connected by
intermediate gradations, it is possible that they were once thus
connected. Mr. Wallace, for instance, describes a certain butterfly
which presents in the same island a great range of varieties connected
by intermediate links, and the extreme links of the chain closely
resemble the two forms of an allied dimorphic species inhabiting
another part of the Malay Archipelago. Thus also with ants, the several
worker-castes are generally quite distinct; but in some cases, as we
shall hereafter see, the castes are connected together by finely
graduated varieties. So it is, as I have myself observed, with some
dimorphic plants. It certainly at first appears a highly remarkable
fact that the same female butterfly should have the power of producing
at the same time three distinct female forms and a male; and that an
hermaphrodite plant should produce from the same seed-capsule three
distinct hermaphrodite forms, bearing three different kinds of females
and three or even six different kinds of males. Nevertheless these
cases are only exaggerations of the common fact that the female
produces offspring of two sexes which sometimes differ from each other
in a wonderful manner.

_Doubtful Species._


The forms which possess in some considerable degree the character of
species, but which are so closely similar to other forms, or are so
closely linked to them by intermediate gradations, that naturalists do
not like to rank them as distinct species, are in several respects the
most important for us. We have every reason to believe that many of
these doubtful and closely allied forms have permanently retained their
characters for a long time; for as long, as far as we know, as have
good and true species. Practically, when a naturalist can unite by
means of intermediate links any two forms, he treats the one as a
variety of the other, ranking the most common, but sometimes the one
first described as the species, and the other as the variety. But cases
of great difficulty, which I will not here enumerate, sometimes arise
in deciding whether or not to rank one form as a variety of another,
even when they are closely connected by intermediate links; nor will
the commonly assumed hybrid nature of the intermediate forms always
remove the difficulty. In very many cases, however, one form is ranked
as a variety of another, not because the intermediate links have
actually been found, but because analogy leads the observer to suppose
either that they do now somewhere exist, or may formerly have existed;
and here a wide door for the entry of doubt and conjecture is opened.

Hence, in determining whether a form should be ranked as a species or a
variety, the opinion of naturalists having sound judgment and wide
experience seems the only guide to follow. We must, however, in many
cases, decide by a majority of naturalists, for few well-marked and
well-known varieties can be named which have not been ranked as species
by at least some competent judges.

That varieties of this doubtful nature are far from uncommon cannot be
disputed. Compare the several floras of Great Britain, of France, or of
the United States, drawn up by different botanists, and see what a
surprising number of forms have been ranked by one botanist as good
species, and by another as mere varieties. Mr. H.C. Watson, to whom I
lie under deep obligation for assistance of all kinds, has marked for
me 182 British plants, which are generally considered as varieties, but
which have all been ranked by botanists as species; and in making this
list he has omitted many trifling varieties, but which nevertheless
have been ranked by some botanists as species, and he has entirely
omitted several highly polymorphic genera. Under genera, including the
most polymorphic forms, Mr. Babington gives 251 species, whereas Mr.
Bentham gives only 112—a difference of 139 doubtful forms! Among
animals which unite for each birth, and which are highly locomotive,
doubtful forms, ranked by one zoologist as a species and by another as
a variety, can rarely be found within the same country, but are common
in separated areas. How many of the birds and insects in North America
and Europe, which differ very slightly from each other, have been
ranked by one eminent naturalist as undoubted species, and by another
as varieties, or, as they are often called, geographical races! Mr.
Wallace, in several valuable papers on the various animals, especially
on the Lepidoptera, inhabiting the islands of the great Malayan
Archipelago, shows that they may be classed under four heads, namely,
as variable forms, as local forms, as geographical races or
sub-species, and as true representative species. The first or variable
forms vary much within the limits of the same island. The local forms
are moderately constant and distinct in each separate island; but when
all from the several islands are compared together, the differences are
seen to be so slight and graduated that it is impossible to define or
describe them, though at the same time the extreme forms are
sufficiently distinct. The geographical races or sub-species are local
forms completely fixed and isolated; but as they do not differ from
each other by strongly marked and important characters, “There is no
possible test but individual opinion to determine which of them shall
be considered as species and which as varieties.” Lastly,
representative species fill the same place in the natural economy of
each island as do the local forms and sub-species; but as they are
distinguished from each other by a greater amount of difference than
that between the local forms and sub-species, they are almost
universally ranked by naturalists as true species. Nevertheless, no
certain criterion can possibly be given by which variable forms, local
forms, sub species and representative species can be recognised.

Many years ago, when comparing, and seeing others compare, the birds
from the closely neighbouring islands of the Galapagos Archipelago, one
with another, and with those from the American mainland, I was much
struck how entirely vague and arbitrary is the distinction between
species and varieties. On the islets of the little Madeira group there
are many insects which are characterized as varieties in Mr.
Wollaston’s admirable work, but which would certainly be ranked as
distinct species by many entomologists. Even Ireland has a few animals,
now generally regarded as varieties, but which have been ranked as
species by some zoologists. Several experienced ornithologists consider
our British red grouse as only a strongly marked race of a Norwegian
species, whereas the greater number rank it as an undoubted species
peculiar to Great Britain. A wide distance between the homes of two
doubtful forms leads many naturalists to rank them as distinct species;
but what distance, it has been well asked, will suffice if that between
America and Europe is ample, will that between Europe and the Azores,
or Madeira, or the Canaries, or between the several islets of these
small archipelagos, be sufficient?

Mr. B.D. Walsh, a distinguished entomologist of the United States, has
described what he calls Phytophagic varieties and Phytophagic species.
Most vegetable-feeding insects live on one kind of plant or on one
group of plants; some feed indiscriminately on many kinds, but do not
in consequence vary.
